\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](1january.md) \] \[ Vespers \]
\[ [Matins & Liturgy](01janMat.md) \]

JANUARY
=======

HAVING THIRTY ONE DAYS

****

On the 1st of the Month —The Circumcision of Our Lord Jesus Christ\
and commemoration of our Father among the Saints Basil the Great.

AT VESPERS
----------

**After the Opening Psalm we recite the 1st section of Blessed is the
man. At** Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Stichera and sing 3 of the
Feast and 3 of the Saint.**

Idiomel Stichera of the Feast.*\
*Tone 4.

The Saviour in coming down to aid the human race accepted circumvolution
in swaddling clothes; he did not abhor circumcision of the flesh, when
eight days old in respect of his Mother, without beginning in respect of
his Father. To him let us believers cry aloud: You are our God; have
mercy on us. (

**Twice**) ****

The same Tone.

God, the supremely good, was not ashamed to be severed by circumcision
of the flesh, but gave us himself as a type and example to all for
salvation. For the Maker of the Law fulfils the requirements of the Law
and the sayings of the Prophets concerning him. You who hold all things
in the hollow of your hand and were wrapped in swaddling clothes, Lord,
glory to you!

****

Prosomia of the Saint.\
Tone 4. Called from the highest.

Called by a name which means royal, when you had shepherded the royal
priesthood, the holy nation of Christ with true wisdom and knowledge,
Father, then the king of kings and Lord of all, the Son eternally of one
mind and without beginning with his Begetter, adorned you, Basil, with a
diadem of the kingdom; implore him to save and enlighten our souls.

Dazzling in the robes of high priesthood, you proclaimed with joy the
Gospel of the kingdom, Basil, pouring out for the Church teachings of
orthodoxy; now enlightened by them we confess one Godhead in a Father
almighty, an only-begotten Word of God and a divine Spirit, and we
glorify it, inseparable in Three Persons; Implore this one Godhead to
save and enlighten our souls.

United and dwelling with the heavenly choirs, whose life you rivalled,
Father Basil, by the radiant sincerity of your way of life, as you lived
among those on earth like one without flesh while still in the body,
implore Christ our God to save those who delight in your teaching,
inspired by God, from dangers and the darkness of ignorance, and to
enlighten our souls.

Glory

**Tone 8. By Anatolios.**

You became a lover of wisdom, Venerable Father, and, preferring a life
lived in companionship with God to all existing things, you abandoned
concern for death, as befitted your life; for having destroyed for
yourself the passions of the flesh by labours of self-mastery and by
care for the Law of God, having kept dignity of your soul unenslaved by
an abundance of virtue, you subdued all fleshly thought by the spirit;
and so, having hated the flesh and the world and ruler of the world, as
you stand before Christ, ask for our souls his great mercy.

Both now

**The same Tone.**

The Saviour in coming down to aid the human race accepted circumvolution
in swaddling clothes; he did not abhor circumcision of the flesh, when
eight days old in respect of his Mother, without beginning in respect of
his Father. To him let us believers cry aloud: You are our God; have
mercy on us.

****

Entrance, the prokeimenon of the day and the Readings.

The Reading is from Genesis.\
\[

**17:1-14**\]

The Lord appeared to Abram and said to him: I am your God. Be well
pleasing before me and be blameless. I will establish my covenant
between me and you, and I will multiply you exceedingly; and you will be
the father of a multitude of nations. And your name will not be called
Abram, but you will be Abraham, because I have established you as father
of many nations. And I will increase you greatly, and I will establish
you for nations, and kings will come forth from you. And I will set my
covenant between me and you, and between your seed after you for their
generations for an eternal covenant, and I will be their God. And
Abraham fell upon his face and worshipped the Lord. And God said to
Abraham: You are to keep my covenant and your seed after you to their
generations. And this is the covenant which you are to keep between me
and between your seed after you to their generations. Every male among
you shall be circumcised; and you shall circumcise the foreskin of your
flesh, and it shall be a sign of a covenant between me and you all. And
every male child among you shall be circumcised at eight days for your
generations. And an uncircumcised male, that is not circumcised in the
flesh of his foreskin on the eighth day, that soul shall be destroyed
from its race; because it has rejected my covenant.

The Reading is from Proverbs.\
\[

**8:22-30**\]

The Lord created me the beginning of his ways for his works. Before the
age he founded me, in the beginning before he made the earth. And before
he made the deeps and before the springs of waters came forth. Before
the mountains were established and before all the hills he begets me.
The Lord made countries and uninhabited places and the high inhabited
parts of the earth. When he was preparing the heaven I was present with
him, and when he marked out his throne upon the winds. When he
strengthened the clouds above and secured the springs of the earth under
heaven; when he gave his commandment to the sea, and the waters will not
transgress his order; and when he was making the foundations of the
earth, I was by him arranging all things. I was that in which he
delighted; and daily I rejoiced in his presence at every moment.

The Reading from the Wisdom of Solomon.\

**Selection**

The mouth of a just man distils wisdom; the lips of men know graces. The
mouth of the wise meditates wisdom; justice delivers them from death.
When a just man dies hope is not lost; for a just son is born for life,
and among his good things he will pluck the fruit of justice. There is
light at all times for the just, and they will find grace and glory from
the Lord. The tongue of the ise knows what is good, and wisdom will take
its rest in their hearts. The Lord loves holy hearts; while all who are
blameless in the way are acceptable to him. The wisdom of the Lord will
enlighten the face of the understanding; for she anticipates those who
desire her before they know it, and is easily contemplated by those who
love her. One who rises for her at dawn will not toil, and one who keeps
vigil because of her will be without care. For she goes about seeking
those who are worthy of her, and shows itself favourably to those in the
ways. Wickedness will never prevail against wisdom. Because of this I
too became a lover of her beauty and became her friend, and I sought her
out from my youth, and I sought to take her as my bride; because the
Master of all things loved her. For she is an initiate of the knowledge
of God one who chooses his works. Her toils are virtues; she teaches
sobriety and prudence; justice and courage, than which nothing is more
useful in human life. If anyone longs for much experience, she knows how
to compare things of old and things that are to come. She knows the
twists of words and the explanations of riddles; she foresees signs and
wonders and the outcomes of seasons and times. And to all she is a good
counsellor. Because immortality is in her, and fame in the fellowship of
her words. Therefore I appealed to the Lord and besought him and said
from my whole heart: God of my Fathers and Lord of mercy, who made all
things by your word, and established humanity by your wisdom to be
master over the creatures that had come into being by you, and to order
the world in holiness and justice; give me Wisdom who sits by your
throne, and do not reject me from among your children, for I am your
servant and the son of your maid servant. Send her out from your holy
dwelling and from the throne of your glory, that she may be present and
teach me what is pleasing before you. And let her guide me with
knowledge and guard me with her glory. For all the thoughts of mortals
are wretched and their ideas are unstable.

****

At the Liti. The idiomel of the Saint of the Monastery and the following
idiomel stichera.

Tone 3. By Germanos.

You made Christ, the source of life, dwell in your soul through your
pure life, Basil, teacher of mysteries, and so you poured out rivers of
orthodox doctrines for the inhabited world; watered from which the
faithful people of the Church offers grace, as the fruit of lips that
confess, to him who has glorified your memory to age on age.

****

The same Tone.

Myrrh of the grace poured out upon you anointed you to minister the
Gospel of the kingdom of heaven, Basil revealer of God; for you became a
sweet fragrance of Christ and filled the inhabited world with the scent
of his knowledge; and so receiving the voices of your servants with
kindness, ask for us who honour you his great mercy.

****

By Vyzas. The same Tone.

Wrapped in the priestly robe, Basil, champion of the Trinity, you took
your stand before the judge’s throne, braving danger for the faith; and
having displayed an athlete’s determination you shamed the fury of the
Governor, who vaunted in the might of impiety; and you preferred the
excision of your inner parts to him who zealously threatened such
things; and becoming a Martyr by choice, you have been bound with a
garland of victory by Christ, who has great mercy.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

Grace was poured out on your lips, Venerable Father, and you became
shepherd of Christ’s Church, teaching the rational sheep to believe in a
consubstantial Trinity in one Godhead.

Both now.

**Of the Feast. Tone 8.**

The Saviour in coming down to aid the human race accepted circumvolution
in swaddling clothes; he did not abhor circumcision of the flesh, when
eight days old in respect of his Mother, without beginning in respect of
his Father. To him let us believers cry aloud: You are our God; have
mercy on us.

****

Aposticha. Idiomel Stichera.\
Tone 1. By Vyzas.

O godly and sacred bee of ChristÂ’s Church, all-blessed Basil; for you
armed yourself with the sting of divine longing and wounded the
blasphemies of heresies hated by God; and you treasured up for the souls
of the faithful the sweetness of true religion; and now, as you pass
through the divine meadows of inviolate pasture, remember us also as you
stand before the consubstantial Trinity.

****

The same Tone.

Verse:

My tongue will speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart
understanding. ****

By Monk Basil.

You have received the imprint of the virtues of all the Saints, our
Father Basil: the meekness of Moses; the zeal of Elias; the confession
of Peter; the theology of John; like Paul you do not cease to cry out:
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is scandalised, and I am not on
fire? Therefore as you now dwell with them, intercede that our souls may
be saved.

****

2nd Tone.

Verse:

The mouth of the just will meditate wisdom; and his tongue speak
judgement. ****

By Monk John.

When you had meditated on the nature of what exists and observed the
instability of all things, you found the only unmoved Being, the Creator
of all things who is above being; to him you attached yourself and cast
away the longing for things which are not. Intercede that we too may
find divine longing, Basil teacher of mysteries.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

You received the grace of wonders from heaven and held up to public
scorn the error of idols by your doctrines, and so you are the glory and
support of High Priests, all-blest Basil, and the pattern of the
teaching of all the Fathers. As you have boldness towards Christ,
implore him that our souls may be saved.

Both now.

**Tone 8.**

God the supremely good was not ashamed to be severed by circumcision of
the flesh, but gave us himself as a type and example for all for
salvation. For the Maker of the Law fulfilled the requirements of the
Law and the sayings of the Prophets concerning him. You who hold all
things in the hollow of your hand and were wrapped in swaddling clothes,
Lord, glory to you!

****

Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 1.

Your sound has gone out into all the earth, for it has received your
word, through which you taught in a manner fitting God; the nature of
what exists you made clear; you set in order the conduct of mankind; O
Royal Priesthood, venerable Father, intercede with Christ God to grant
us his great mercy.

****

Another, of the Feast.\
Tone 1. Citizen of the desert.

Without change you took a human form, by nature being God, O most
compassionate Lord; and fulfilling the Law, you willingly accepted
circumcision in the flesh, that you might banish shadows, and strip away
the covering of our passions. Glory to your goodness; glory to your
compassion; glory to your ineffable condescension, O Word!

****

And Dismissal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**
