\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](24dec.md) \]
\[ [Royal Hours](24decRH.md) \] \[ Vespers \]

ON THE 24TH OF THE MONTH
========================

Commemoration of the Holy Virgin Martyr Evgenia.

AT VESPERS
----------

**At** Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Stichera, and we sing Prosomia
of the Forefeast.**

Tone 4. As noblest of Martyrs.

Let us sound the cymbals, let us cry out with joy in songs: Christ’s
revelation has been made manifest. The proclamations of the Prophets
have reached their term, for the one they said would appear in flesh to
mortals is being brought to birth in a holy Cave, laid in a manger like
a babe and wrapped in swaddling clothes like little child.

With upright mind let us make songs ring out for the Forefeast of
Christ’s Nativity. For he that is equal in honour to the Father and the
Spirit, having through compassion clothed himself in our matter, is
about to be born in the city of Bethlehem. Shepherds with Angels sand
the praise of his ineffable birth.

Seeing a Conception beyond explanation and Birth beyond expression, the
Virgin was amazed. Rejoicing and yet also weeping she exclaimed, ‘How
can I offer my breast the him who nourishes the universe? Or how can I
sing your praise as both my Son and my God? By what title can I address
you, Lord beyond all naming?’

****

Prosomia of the Saint. Tone 2. When from the Tree.

When with godlike foresight you went out from the city, you clearly left
behind the pleasure of the world; and having heard the sweet melody of
psalms, you were flooded with the light of divine knowledge; while
having conceived fear in your womb, you gave birth to a divine and
saving Spirit for those who journeyed with you.

When you had been made a bride of Christ, with zeal you brought to your
servants to him, bearing them as a living gift, imitating your courage,
Evgenia, shining out clearly with faith and grace, practising every
virtue, as true Martyrs proclaiming to all true religion.

Clearly illumined by the beam of the Spirit, you bring a choir of
virgins to Christ, having caught them by your word of wisdom and shown
them the course of the path that leads on high, you guided them to shine
with the blood of Martyrs. Dancing with them, you have now found a
fitting desire: true delight, all-praised Martyr.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 2.**

See, the moment of our salvation has drawn near. Cave, make ready, the
Virgin draws near to give birth. Bethlehem, land of Juda, rejoice and be
glad, because from you our Lord has dawned. Listen, mountains and hills
and all the country of Judea, for Christ is coming to save humanity that
he fashioned, for he loves mankind.

****

At the Aposticha, Idiomels.\
Tone 1. By Anatolios.

You peoples, let us celebrate the Eve of Christ’s Nativity; and raising
our minds on high let us go up in spirit to Bethlehem; and with the eyes
of the soul let us look on the Virgin as she hastens to give birth in a
Cave to our God, the Lord of all things. Joseph, when he looked on the
greatness of his wonders, thought that what he saw was a mortal, wrapped
in swaddling clothes as a babe; but from all that came to pass he
understood that it was the true God, who grants our souls his great
mercy.

****

Verse:

God will come from Theman, and the Holy One from a shaded, wooded
mountain. ****

Same Tone. Also by Anatolios.

You peoples, let us celebrate the Eve of Christ’s Nativity; and raising
our minds on high let us go up in spirit to Bethlehem; and look on the
great mystery in a Cave; for Eden has been opened as God comes forth
from a pure Virgin, perfect in his divinity as in his humanity.
Therefore let us cry: Holy God, Father without beginning, Holy Strong,
incarnate Son, Holy Immortal, Comforter Spirit. Holy Trinity, glory to
you!

****

Verse:

Lord, I heard your report and I was afraid; Lord, I considered your
works, and was amazed. ****

Same Tone. Also by Anatolios.

Hear, O heaven, and give ear, O earth; for see, the Son and Word of God
the Father comes forth to be born of a maiden who has not known man, by
the good pleasure of him who begat him impassibly and by the
co-operation of the Holy Spirit. Bethlehem, prepare; Eden, open your
gate, for he who is becomes what he was not, and the Fashioner of all
creation is fashioned, he who grants the world his great mercy.

Glory. Both Now.

**Tone 6.**

Cave prepare, for the Ewe Lamb comes bearing Christ in her womb; Manger
receive him who with a word has loosed us born of earth from irrational
action. Shepherds abiding in the fields, bear witness to a fearful
wonder; Magi from Persia, offer the King gold, frankincense and myrrh;
for the Lord has appeared from a Virgin mother. Bending over him like a
slave, his Mother worshipped him and addressed him as he lay in her
arms: How were you sown in me? How have you grown in me, my Redeemer and
my God?

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.

Mary once, with aged Joseph, went to be enrolled in Bethlehem, for they
were of David’s line; and she bore in her womb the fruit unsown. The
time of the birth was at hand and there was no room at the inn; but the
Cave proved a fair palace for the Queen. Christ is born, that he may
raise up again his image that of old had fallen.

****

Three times, and Dismissal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**
