\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ Akathist \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; color: red; text-transform: uppercase"}

canon of the akathist
=====================

[INTRODUCTION]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; text-transform: uppercase"}
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

[The Canon of the Akathist is sung on the Saturday of the Akathist
during Great Lent, but it also used when the Akathist is sung at Small
Compline on the Fridays of Lent in Greek
parishes.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

[This translation makes no attempt to reproduce either the metre or the
acrostic of the original.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

[I have added a number of references to many of the biblical passages
used or alluded to in the
text.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; text-transform: uppercase"}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**CANON OF THE AKATHIST**

A Composition of Joseph the Hymnographer

[The Acrostic, without the Irmi, is:]{style="color:red"}\
Vessel of joy, to you alone Â‘Hail!Â’ belongs.

[Ode 1. Tone 4. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

I will open my mouth[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1} and it will
be filled with the Spirit, and I will utter a
word[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2} for the
Queen and Mother, and I shall be seen keeping glad festival, and
rejoicing I will sing her wonders.

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

Pure Virgin, living book of Christ, sealed by the
Spirit[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3}, beholding
you the great Archangel cried to you, Â‘Hail, vessel of joy! Through
which the curse of our first mother[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4} will be
abolishedÂ’.

Hail, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and death of hell! Hail,
All-unblemished, palace of the only King! Hail, fiery
throne[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5} of the
Almighty!

Hail, from whom alone there sprung the unfading Rose! Hail, you who gave
birth to the sweet‑smelling Apple! Hail, nosegay of the King of all,
unwedded preservation of the world.

Hail, treasure‑house of purity, through whom we have been raised from
our fall! Hail, Sovereign Lady, lily[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6} whose sweet
scent perfumes the faithful; fragrant incense and myrrh of great
price[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7}.

[Ode 3. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

O Mother of God, as living and ungrudging source, establish those united
in spiritual fellowship who sing you hymns of praise, and in your divine
glory grant them crowns of glory.

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

From you, as land untilled, grew the divine Ear of corn. Hail, living
Table that held the Bread of Life![[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8} Hail,
Sovereign Lady, never failing spring of the living
Water[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9}.

Heifer, who gave birth for the faithful to the unblemished sacrificial
Victim,[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10} hail!
Hail, Ewe-lamb that bore the Lamb of God, who takes away the sins of all
the world![[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11} Hail, fervent
mercy‑seat![[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn12){#_ftnref12}

Hail, radiant dawn, who alone bears Christ the Sun! Hail, dwelling‑place
of the Light! Hail, you that dispersed the gloom and utterly destroyed
the demons of the darkness.

Hail, only gate through which the Word alone has
passed![[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn13){#_ftnref13} By your
birth giving, Sovereign Lady, you smashed the bars and
gates[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn14){#_ftnref14} of Hell.
Hail, All-praised, divine entrance of the saved!

[Ode 4. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

The One seated in glory on the throne of the
Godhead,[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn15){#_ftnref15} Jesus, the
One above all godhead, has come on a light
cloud[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn16){#_ftnref16} and with
his unsullied hand has saved those who cry: Â‘Glory, O Christ, to your
power!Â’

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to you, O Virgin worthy of all
praise, Â‘Hail, rich mountain, curdled by the
Spirit![[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn17){#_ftnref17} Hail,
Lampstand[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn18){#_ftnref18} and Vessel bearing the
Manna[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn19){#_ftnref19} that
sweetens the senses of the godly!Â’

Mercy‑seat[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn20){#_ftnref20} of the
world, hail, Lady undefiled! Hail, Ladder raising all from earth by
grace![[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn21){#_ftnref21} Hail,
Bridge that has truly brought over from death to life all those who sing
your praises .

Hail, Immaculate, higher than the heavens, who without birth-Â­pangs
carried in your womb the Foundation of the earth! Hail, sea‑shell that
from your blood dyed a robe of divine purple for the king of Powers.

Hail, Sovereign Lady, who in truth gave birth to the Lawgiver who freely
washes clean the transgressions of all! Depth unsearchable, who did not
know wedlock, height above all speech, through whom we have been made
divine.

You wove for the world a crown not woven by human hand, and we sing your
praises, as we cry aloud, Â‘Hail to you, Virgin, the guardian of all,
fortress and stronghold and sacred refuge!Â’

[Ode 5. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

The universe was amazed at your divine glory, for you, O Virgin, who did
not know wedlock, held in your womb the God over all and gave birth to
an eternal Son, who gives salvation as the prize to all who sing your
praise.

[Troparia]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; color: red; font-style: normal"}[.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{#Mar14}Hail, All‑blameÂ­less, who bore the
Way[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn22){#_ftnref22} of life,
who saved the world from the flood[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn23){#_ftnref23} of sin!
Hail, Bride of God, tidings fearful to tell and hear! Hail, dwelling
Â­place of the Master of Creation!

Hail, Undefiled, the strength and fortress of humankind, place of
sanctification of the Glory![[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn24){#_ftnref24} Hail,
slayer of hell, bridal chamber full of light! Hail, joy of the angel!
Hail, succour of those who call on you with faith!

Fiery chariot[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn25){#_ftnref25} of the
Word, hail, Sovereign Lady, living Paradise, having in your midst the
Lord, the Tree of Life![[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn26){#_ftnref26} His
sweetness gives life to all who partake with faith, who had bowed
beneath corruption.

Strengthened by your might, we raise our cry to you with faith, Â‘Hail,
city of the King of all![[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn27){#_ftnref27} Glorious
things and worthy to be heard are plainly spoken of
you.[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn28){#_ftnref28} Hail,
mountain not cut by human hand,[[\[29\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn29){#_ftnref29} depth that
none can fathom!

Hail, Undefiled, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which put forth
the divine Pearl! Hail, Mother of God full of wonders, reconciliation
with God of all those in every age that call you blessed!

[Ode 6. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

Come, godly-minded people, as we celebrate this divine and honoured
feast of the Mother of God, let us clap our hands as we glorify the God
who was born from her.

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

Spotless bridal chamber of the Word, cause of the deification of all,
hail, All-immaculate, the resonance of the Prophets! Hail, the adornment
of the Apostles!

From you dropped down the dew that quenched the flame of idolatry. We
therefore cry to you, Â‘Hail, Virgin, Fleece wet with dew that Gideon
saw in prophecy!Â’[ [[\[30\]]{style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn30){#_ftnref30}]{.MsoFootnoteReference}

See, to you we cry Â‘Hail!Â’ Be our haven as we toss upon the deep, our
anchorage in the ocean of afflictions and all the snares of the enemy.

Cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace that we may cry to you,
Â‘Hail, Bush unburned,[[\[31\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn31){#_ftnref31} Cloud all
of light that without ceasing **** overshadows the
faithful![[\[32\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn32){#_ftnref32}

[Ode 7. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

The godlike Youths did not worship creation instead of the Creator, but
bravely trampling on the threat of fire, rejoicing they sang, Â‘O highly
exalted Lord and God of our fathers, blessed are
you!Â’[[\[33\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn33){#_ftnref33}

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

We sing your praises, crying, Â‘Hail! chariot of the spiritual Sun; true
Vine that has produced the ripe Cluster of
grapes,[[\[34\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn34){#_ftnref34} from which
there flows a wine making glad the souls of the faithful, as they give
you glory.

Hail, Bride of God, who bore the Healer of all; mystical Staff that
blossomed with the unfading Flower![[\[35\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn35){#_ftnref35} Hail,
Sovereign Lady, through you we are filled with joy and inherit life!

No tongue, however eloquent, Sovereign Lady, has strength to sing your
praise. You have been exalted above the Seraphim, for you bore Christ
the King. Entreat him now to deliver from **** all harm those who
worship you in faith.

The ends of the earth praise you and call you blessed, and they cry to
you, Â‘Hail, pure Virgin, scroll on which the Word has been written by
the FatherÂ’s finger![[\[36\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn36){#_ftnref36} Entreat
him,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Mother of God, to inscribe your
servants in the Book of Life.

We your servants entreat you, and bend the knee of our heart. Incline
your ear and save us, Mother of God, for we are drowning in afflictions;
and preserve your City from all capture by enemies.

[Ode 8. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

The Offspring of the Mother of God saved the innocent Youths in the
furnace. Then he was prefigured, but now in reality he gathers the whole
world which sings, Â‘Praise the Lord, his works, and highly exalt him to
all the ages.Â’[[\[37\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn37){#_ftnref37}

[Troparia.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; color: red; font-style: normal; mso-bidi-font-style: italic"}
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

You received the Word within your womb, and you carried him who carries
all things. You fed with milk him who by his will alone feeds all the
inhabited earth. To him, pure Virgin, we sing, Â‘All you works of the
Lord, praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the agesÂ’.

Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of your giving
birth, holy and immaculate Virgin;[[\[38\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn38){#_ftnref38} and the
Youths preÂ­figured this most clearly as they stood in the midst of the
fire and were not burned. Therefore we sing your praise to all the ages.

We who once were stripped naked through
deception,[[\[39\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn39){#_ftnref39} have been
clothed by your childbearing in the robe of incorruption; and we who
once sat in the darkness of transgressions have seen the
Light,[[\[40\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn40){#_ftnref40} O Maiden,
dwelling‑place of Light. Therefore we sing your praise to all the ages.

Through you the dead are given life,[[\[41\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn41){#_ftnref41} for you
bore the One who is life in person. Those once called dumb speak
eloquently, lepers are cleansed, diseases driven out; the multitudes of
the spirits of the air are conquered, O Virgin, salvation of
mortals.[[\[42\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn42){#_ftnref42}

You gave birth to salvation for the world, pure Virgin, and through you
we have been raised from earth to heaven. Hail, All‑blessed, protection
and defence, rampart and stronghold of those who sing,[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Â‘All you works of the Lord, praise the Lord
and highly exalt him to all the agesÂ’.

[Ode 9. Irmos.]{style="color:red"}

Let all born of earth, bearing torches, in spirit leap for joy; let the
nature of the immaterial Minds keep festival as it honours the sacred
festival of the Mother of God, and let it cry, Â‘Hail, all-blessed
Mother of God, pure and Ever-Virgin!Â’

[Troparia.]{style="color:red"}

That we believers, who through you, O Maiden, have become partakers of
everlasting joy, may cry to you, Â‘Hail!Â’, deliver us from
temptation,[[\[43\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn43){#_ftnref43} from
capture by the enemy, and from every other ill that comes on sinful
mortals because of the multitude of their transgressions.

You have been revealed as our enlightenment and confirmation, and so we
cry to you, Â‘Hail, never‑setting star that brings into the world the
mighty Sun! Hail, pure Virgin who opened Eden that was
shut![[\[44\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn44){#_ftnref44} Hail,
Pillar of fire,[[\[45\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn45){#_ftnref45} leading
humanity to the life on high!Â’

Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry
aloud, Â‘Hail, Sovereign Lady of the world! Hail, Mary, Lady over all!
Hail, you who alone are blameless and fair among women! Hail, vessel
that received the inexhaustible Myrrh, emptied out upon you!

Hail, Ever‑Virgin, dove that bore the Merciful! Hail, glory of all the
Saints, crown of the Champions! Hail, divine adornment of all the Just
and salvation of us the faithful.

Spare your inheritance, O God, disregarding all our sins. For this you
have interceding with you her who on earth conceived you without seed,
when in your great mercy, O Christ, you willed to be shaped in a form
that was not your own.

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1} Psalm 77:2

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2} Psalm 44:1

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3} Isaias 29:11

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4} cf. Gen. 3:16

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5} cf. Dan. 7:9

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6} cf. Song of Songs 2:1-2

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7} cf. John 12:3

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8} Exodus 25:23-30

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9} cf. John 7:38

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10} cf. Luke 15:23

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11} cf. John 1:29

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref12){#_ftn12} Exodus 25:17-22, Romans 3:25, Hebrews
9:5

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref13){#_ftn13} Ezekiel 44:1-3

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref14){#_ftn14} Psalm 106:16

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref15){#_ftn15} cf. Isaias 6:1

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref16){#_ftn16} Isaias 19:1

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref17){#_ftn17} Psalm 67:17

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref18){#_ftn18} Exodus 25:31-40

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref19){#_ftn19} Hebrews 9:4

</div>

<div id="ftn20" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref20){#_ftn20} Exodus 25:17-22, Romans 3:25, Hebrews
9:5

</div>

<div id="ftn21" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref21){#_ftn21} Gen. 28:10-17

</div>

<div id="ftn22" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref22){#_ftn22} John14:6

</div>

<div id="ftn23" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref23){#_ftn23} cf. Gen. 6-9

</div>

<div id="ftn24" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref24){#_ftn24} cf. Ezekiel 3:12

</div>

<div id="ftn25" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref25){#_ftn25} cf. 3 Kingd. 2:11, Ezekiel 1

</div>

<div id="ftn26" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref26){#_ftn26} Gen. 2:9, 3:22-24, Apocalypse 2:7,
22:2.22

</div>

<div id="ftn27" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref27){#_ftn27} Psalm 47:3

</div>

<div id="ftn28" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref28){#_ftn28} Psalm 86:3

</div>

<div id="ftn29" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[29\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref29){#_ftn29} Daniel 2:34

</div>

<div id="ftn30" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[30\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref30){#_ftn30} cf. Judges 5:4, 6:36-40, Daniel 3:50

</div>

<div id="ftn31" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[31\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref31){#_ftn31} Exodus 3:1-6

</div>

<div id="ftn32" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[32\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref32){#_ftn32}[ Exodus 13:21 etc., Sirach
24:4]{lang="FR" style="mso-ansi-language:FR"}

</div>

<div id="ftn33" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[33\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref33){#_ftn33} Daniel 3

</div>

<div id="ftn34" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[34\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref34){#_ftn34} Numbers 13:23-24

</div>

<div id="ftn35" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[35\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref35){#_ftn35} Numbers 17:1-11, Hebrews 9:4

</div>

<div id="ftn36" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[36\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref36){#_ftn36}[ cf. Isaias 8:1, Phil. 3:5, Apoc. 3:5,
13:8, 20:12, 21:27]{lang="FR" style="mso-ansi-language:FR"}

</div>

<div id="ftn37" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[37\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref37){#_ftn37} Daniel 3

</div>

<div id="ftn38" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[38\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref38){#_ftn38} Exodus 3:1-6

</div>

<div id="ftn39" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[39\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref39){#_ftn39} Gen. 3:7

</div>

<div id="ftn40" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[40\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref40){#_ftn40} Luke 1:79, Psalm 35:10

</div>

<div id="ftn41" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[41\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref41){#_ftn41} cf. John 5:21

</div>

<div id="ftn42" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[42\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref42){#_ftn42} cf. Luke 7:22

</div>

<div id="ftn43" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[43\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref43){#_ftn43} cf. Matthew 6:13

</div>

<div id="ftn44" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[44\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref44){#_ftn44} Gen. 3:24

</div>

<div id="ftn45" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[45\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref45){#_ftn45} Exodus 13:21-22

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
