\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](general.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Prophet](prophet.md) \]
\[ [Office for an Apostle](apostle.md) \]
\[ Office for Two or More Apostles \]
\[ [Office for a Martyr](martyr.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Woman Martyr](wmart.md) \]
\[ [Office for Two or More Martyrs](martyrs.md) \]
\[ [Office for Two or More Women martyrs](wmarts.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Hieromartyr](hieromartyr.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Bishop](bishop.md) \]
\[ [Office for an Ascetic](monk.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Woman Ascetic](wascetic.md) \]

AT VESPERS
==========

**At** Lord, I have cried **we sing the 3 following Prosomia.**

Tone 4. As noble among Martyrs.

As eye witnesses and ones who testified to the incarnation of the Word,
O truly happy disciples, you are called blessed, for shining like
flashes of lightning, you appeared to the world, and like spiritual
mountains you dripped sweetness; divided like ever-flowing rivers of
Paradise, you water the churches of the nations with divine streams.

Like thunderbolts, blazing with the beams of the Spirit, you were sent
out through all the world, granting ungrudgingly the force of wonders,
ministers of the mysteries of Christ and written tablets of God’s grace,
inscribed by God with the law taught by God, all-blessed initiates.

The rod of the fishermen troubled the arrogance of philosophers and the
eloquence of rhetors; for they clearly set out the teachings of divine
wisdom, the doctrines of graces and the Gospel of ten thousand
blessings, the participation in eternal delight, the pleasures of angels
and enduring glory.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We, who are much storm-tossed on the sea of the troubles and harsh
difficulties of life, have you as the most sheltered haven of salvation,
and as gentle calm; and so we all have recourse to you as we cry out:
Never cease to stand by your servants.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

O all-immaculate Ewe-lamb, you bore the unblemished Lamb, who came to
heal the sin of the whole world by his own blood, who was slaughtered
for our sake and gave life to the universe; clothe me, who have been
stripped naked of divine incorruption, with the cloak of divine grace
from the wool of your Offspring.

AT MATINS
=========

**The Canon, of which the acrostic is:\
**I honour the wise Apostles of Christ.

****

Ode 1. Tone 4. Irmos. Through the Red Sea’s deep.

\[Through the Red Sea’s deep the Israel of old marched dry shod, and by
Moses’ hands, outstretched in the form of a cross, routed the power of
Amalek in the wilderness.\]

****

Troparia.

As I long to sing the choir of the Apostles, grant me, O Christ, as God,
at their intercessions, the ray of the all-holy Spirit and the lamp of
your wisdom.

Your revered Apostles, O Christ, given strength by your strength and
grace, made godlike by their unyielding inclinations towards you,
triumphed over the power of hostile foes.

Performing healings, Master, in your name, your far-famed Apostles,
caught the gatherings of the nations with your knowledge and made them
shine with your light.

Made disciples by heavenly wisdom, glorious Apostles of Christ, you
clearly made foolish all the useless verbiage of the wise by the brevity
of the proclamation.

****

Theotokion.

You bore him who is by nature Creator and who has truly made us divine
by a union beyond understanding, all-praised Mother of God. Implore him
fervently to guide to the light those who sing your praise.

****

Ode 3. Irmos. Your Church, O Christ.

\[Your Church, O Christ, rejoices in you and cries, You, Lord, are my
strength, my refuge and my firmament.\]

****

Troparia.

Speaking of God upon earth, aflame with tongues of fire, you handed down
heavenly and revered doctrines, Heralds of Christ.

You revealed your disciples, Master, as spiritual heavens, who declare
all your glory to the ends of the earth.

You have been inscribed in heaven and revealed as companions of Christ;
now, O all-wise, willingly guard us who honour you.

****

Theotokion.

He who dwells in the highest dwelt among us, O Immaculate, for he took
flesh from you without seed and was made manifest.

****

Irmos.

Your Church, O Christ, rejoices in you and cries, ‘You, Lord, are my
strength, my refuge and my firmament.’

****

Kathisma. Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

With the net of the divine words you caught the rational fish and
brought them as first-fruits to our God, and longing to put on the marks
of Christ you were revealed as imitators of his Passion, glorious
Apostles; therefore we have come together and honour as is fitting your
all-festive memorial, and with one voice we cry out to you: Intercede
with Christ God to bestow forgiveness of faults on those who celebrate
with love your holy memorial.

****

Theotokion. Same melody.

Hail throne of God, formed of fire; hail Maiden, royal seat, couch
strewn with purple, gold and purple bridal chamber, cloak of true
sea-purple, most costly sacred enclosure, lightning-bearing chariot,
lampstand of many lights; hail Mother of God, city with twelve walls,
gate plated with gold, and chamber formed of splendour, table splendid
with gold, tabernacle adorned by God; hail glorious bride, cascading
gold, hail only salvation of my soul.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

The Ewe-lamb seeing the Lamb and Shepherd and Redeemer on the Cross,
lamented and wept and bitterly cried out: The world rejoices, for it
receives redemption, but my inward parts are on fire as I see your
crucifixion, which you endure through the compassion of your mercy,
long-suffering Lord, the abyss of mercy; have compassion and bestow
forgiveness of faults on those who hymn with faith your divine
sufferings.

****

Ode 4. Irmos. Seeing you, the Sun of justice.

\[Seeing you, the Sun of justice, lifted up on the Cross, the Church
stands in her array and fittingly cries out, ‘Glory to your power, O
Lord!’\]

****

Troparia.

The sound of the divine words of the Apostles has passed like a torch of
fire through the whole inhabited world, burning up the fuel of error,
but enlightening by grace the companies of the devout.

The Disciples, appearing like beacons lit by God, made the world,
blackened by the fog of godlessness, bright by the rays of grace and the
beams of the proclamation.

Dazzling with most sacred lamps of the spiritual Sun, you shine in the
world like the sun, all-praised Apostles, by the light of the godhead,
as you chase away the fog of error.

With your Cross as a rod of power, O Word, your eye-witnesses cut
through the salt sea of life, like horses troubling the waves of
polytheism.

****

Theotokion.

Your living heaven, made lovely with the outpouring of varied light, O
Christ, the King of kings, the immaculate Virgin is now glorified as
Mother of God.

****

Ode 5. Irmos. You, Lord, my light.

\[You, Lord, my light, came into the world, a holy light, turning from
the darkness of ignorance those who sing your praise in faith.\]

****

Troparia.

Your godlike and all-wise servants, O Christ, you showed as a light in
the world, announcing you to all, the light that does not set.

Outstandingly practising every virtue, Apostles, you destroyed all the
snares of the manifold wickedness of the demons.

The Apostles, enflamed by fiery tongues, revealed to us the shining of
the Trinity, of the Godhead in Unity.

****

Theotokion.

We present you as an unbreakable weapon against enemies; we have gained
you as anchor and hope of our salvation, O Bride of God.

****

Ode 6. Irmos I will sacrifice to you.

\[‘I will sacrifice to you with a voice of praise, O Lord’, the Church
cries to you, cleansed from the filth of demons by the blood which
flowed with pity from your side.\]

****

Troparia.

Establishing your Disciples by wisdom and wonders, O Saviour, you made
them more powerful than the prattling of the Greeks, and they destroyed
their deceiving doctrines.

The divine rivers of wisdom have filled all the valleys of the Church
with waters, being rich in the streams from the wells of salvation.

Appearing like living stars, all-blessed Apostles, you scattered every
gloomy error with bright beams of light, as you blazed with the
knowledge of God.

****

Theotokion.

Having found you as a wholly perfect dove, and as an all-fair and
shining lily and flower of the valleys, Mother of God, the Bridegroom
dwelt in your womb.

****

Irmos.

‘I will sacrifice to you with a voice of praise, O Lord’, the Church
cries to you, cleansed from the filth of demons by the blood which
flowed with pity from your side.

****

Ode 7. Irmos. In the Persian furnace.

\[In the Persian furnace the Children of Abraham, fired by love for true
religion rather than by the flame, cried out: Blessed are you, O Lord,
in the temple of your glory.\]

****

Troparia.

God before by nature, you made your disciples sons and revealed them as
truly heirs of your Father’s glory, O Supremely Good, and you were
well-pleased for them to accompany you as God and Master.

You granted your godlike Disciples, O Word, a flood of wisdom, a breadth
of heart, an eloquent tongue, you sent them out to proclaim the Gospel
of the Kingdom to all the nations.

Appearing like clouds of divine light, the Apostles rained life-giving
water on all the nations, as they cried: Blessed are you in the temple
of your glory.

****

Theotokion.

You appeared all-adorned with divine glory, O Immaculate, who alone from
all eternity received the Word of God, O Virgin Mother; blessed are you
among women, all-blameless Lady.

****

Ode 8. Irmos. Stretching out his hands.

\[Stretching out his hands Daniel closed the jaws of the lions in the
den; while the Youths, lovers of true religion, girded with virtue,
quenched the power of the fire as they cried: Bless the Lord, all you
works of the Lord.\]

****

Troparia.

The godly and all-wise choir of Christ’s Apostles by the fire of the
Spirit burned up like easily sawn fuel the sacred images of the demons,
and guided to the light the hearts of the believers who cry: All you
works of the Lord, bless the Lord.

With one accord let us honour with hymns the godlike Disciples and
Apostles of Christ, who thundered to us the heavenly doctrines, they are
the meadows of the faith, the general benefactors of humanity, the
servants of the Saviour.

The all-revered and spacious vessels of the virtues, the first-fruits of
mortals, the trumpets of the proclamation, the torrents of incorruptible
life, the god-bearing lightnings, the springs of healings, the beautiful
feet of the Gospel, let us honour.

****

Theotokion.

He was full, yet emptied himself that we might share his fullness; the
uncircumscribed Word, without abandoning the Father’s bosom, was
incarnate from your womb; therefore we all bless you, Mary, Bride of
God.

****

Irmos.

Stretching out his hands Daniel closed the jaws of the lions in the den;
while the Youths, lovers of true religion, girded with virtue, quenched
the power of the fire as they cried: Bless the Lord, all you works of
the Lord.

****

Ode 9. Irmos. A cornerstone not cut by hand.

\[A cornerstone not cut by hand, O Virgin, was cut from you an unhewn
mountain: Christ who joined together separated natures; and so with
gladness, Mother of God, we magnify you.\]

****

Troparia.

Eye-witnesses of God you received from the Master authority to loose the
bonds of faults; in compassion wipe out the sins of those who sing your
praise and make them worthy of salvation.

Wise Apostles, you all received the whole radiance of the Spirit, which
appeared to you in reality, and you were initiated into exalted
teachings in the upper room, and now you are worthily called blessed.

To you his friends now at rest Christ gives the prize of unfading crowns
and fullness of contemplation; implore him now that the Churches may be
kept safe.

****

Theotokion.

Wishing to dwell in flesh, he who disposed all things by a word, dwelt
in you; having found you alone to be holier than all, and declared you
to be in truth Mother of God, O Virgin Mother.

****

Irmos.

A cornerstone not cut by hand, O Virgin, was cut from you an unhewn
mountain: Christ who joined together separated natures; and so with
gladness, Mother of God, we magnify you.

****

At the Liturgy look, if you wish, on the 18th of October.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
