\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sunday_of_orthodoxy.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](vespers1.md) \] \[ [Synodikon](synodikon.md) \]
\[ Canon of the Synodikon \]

**CANON FOR THE SYNODIKON OF ORTHODOXY**

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

INTRODUCTION
------------

[In the Triodia this Canon is ascribed to Theodore the Studite, but it
cannot be by him, since he had died several years earlier. The author is
almost certainly the Patriarch St Methodios. The troparion of the 8th
Ode which speaks of the famous Icon of Christ above the Bronze Gate of
the Palace reminds one of the poem on the subject that was written by
the Patriarch Methodios to celebrate its restoration. The rubric in the
Triodion says, Â’after the Dismissal of Matins and before the Liturgy,
we go in procession, together with wood of the Cross and the revered
Icons, to the place where the Synodikon is to be read. As we go and as
we return we sing the following CanonÂ’. If this canon was first sung in
843, it is tempting to suggest that it may have been sung as the clergy
and people made their way from the church of the Mother of God in
Blachernae, where the vigil had been celebrated, to the Great Church,
where the Liturgy was to be celebrated.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[It is perhaps worth remarking that one of those present would almost
certainly have been a seventeen year old boy from Thessalonika, who had
recently been sent to Constantinople on the death of his father and
placed in the care of Theoktistos the Logothete, the Empress TheodoraÂ’s
chief minister. The young manÂ’s name was Constantine; though he is
better known by his monastic name, Cyril Â— the Apostle of the
Slavs.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Canon presents a number of linguistic and historical problems, and
this translation is only provisional. One of the historical problems is
why such prominence is given to otherwise almost wholly unknown
character, Lezix, who appears here as one of the leaders of the
iconoclasts. It seems that he was subsequently reconciled to the Church
by the Patriarch himself.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The two troparia that are sung after the Canon are not without
interest. The first, which is now the Apolytikion for the day, seems to
have been a rallying song of the Iconodules, for we read in the life of
St Theodore the Studite that shortly after the exile of Patriarch
Nikephoros and the removal of the icons, St Theodore organised a solemn
procession of the icons, during which this troparion was sung. In his
Life we read that Â‘he ordered all the monks under him to take the icons
in their hands, hold them high and then march round the whole circuit of
the monastery, sing the hymn, Â“We worship your most pure icon, loving
LordÂ”, together with other hymns of victory to Christ the Victor. This
took place on the glorious feast of Palms, which we all believers
celebrate before the Passion and Resurrection of the MasterÂ’ \[PG
99:185\].]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The other troparion formed part of the ancient office for the First
Sunday of Lent, which was dedicated to the Prophets, in particular
Moses, Aaron and Samuel. The three are found together in Psalm 96:6,
]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[Moses
and Aaron were among his priests: and Samuel among those that call upon
his name]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[.
The present Gospel for this Sunday is also a survival from the ancient
office, and it was chosen presumably because of the words of the Apostle
Philip to Nathaniel, Â’]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[We have found the one about whom
Moses wrote in the law, and also the prophets, Jesus, son of Joseph,
from Nazareth]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;
mso-bidi-language:HE"}[Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[.]{lang="EN-US"
style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;
mso-bidi-language:HE"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CANON FOR THE SYNODIKON OF ORTHODOXY
------------------------------------

[By
Methodios]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}

[Ode 1. Tone
6.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}[ Helper and
Protector]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}

[Let us believers sing a song of thanksgiving to our God, the Benefactor
of all things, for he has raised up a saving horn for us, a mighty
kingdom, a champion of Orthodoxy.
\[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Truly divine grace has appeared to the inhabited world, glory and
honour have appeared, the Church leaps for joy, having received the robe
of its own baring.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[ChristÂ’s tunic, previously rent by John the deceiver and poisoner, the
godly Fathers have now woven and given to the
Church.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The Church, having taken up the LordÂ’s form, rejoices and leaps with
gladness with her children, as she has received from him prizes of
victory, symbols of Orthodoxy.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Let the haters, dreadful Lizix and Antony with John and Theodore, both
deniers of the faith, be ashamed and turned
back.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Iannes and Iambres, who opposed Moses the Lawgiver of old, were put to
shame; while now John the deceiver is truly routed with
Antony.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[You tore apart the faction of GodÂ’s foes, O Christ, and have now
restored to the Church her robe, the Church for which you poured out
your blood, as you are good.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[I contemplate you, O Trinity, and worship your divine might; deliver me
from trials of every kind, for I believe in you, Father, Son and
all-holy Spirit.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Both now.
**Theotokion.**]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Wearing from you the royal robe, O Virgin, God appeared to mortals in
human form, double in being; the form of his form we hold in
veneration.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Ode
3.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}[ Establish,
Lord]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}

[Rejoice, all you choirs of Fathers and Apostles, as you behold the
worship of the Icons, which you clearly handed down.
\[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Let the all-unblemished Church cry out, Â‘I have received my beauty and
put on my robe, of which John had stripped
meÂ’.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Be ashamed, you lawless, who battle against the Lord, for he was
incarnate and has been made manifest in an image, which we embrace in a
relative manner.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Who would speak out the foul doctrines and lawless teachings of the
insane John, expounding Delphic ways?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Anathema to Lizix and John, with Antony, Theodore the godless
blasphemer, together with insane Theodotos!]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The blood shed for the divine likeness of the incarnate Master cries
out; blood that was shed by John.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The Lord has expelled the horde of aliens and has given back to his own
what was theirs. Glory to his goodness!]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Let us worship with right belief the will that is without beginning,
the authority and sovereign power of the Trinity, ever rejecting
Arius.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Both[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[We confess you to be truly the Sovereign Lady who gave birth to God,
heeding not the words of Nestorios, but the doctrines of the
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Ode 4. [The prophet
heard]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea;
color:red"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:Odyssea"}

[Rejoice with gladness, O Church, and every city, town and village; let
the monasteries be opened and the nunneries adorned. Let then fittingly
worship the relics and icons of the Martyrs.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Christ invites you! Now godly Fathers assemble with eagerness and
recount, like the Apostles, the spectacle of his Incarnation, his
miracles and his sufferings, as the Sacred Gospel
writes.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Assemble rejoicing with boldness, you multitudes of monks, for though
they were evilly strong, the cowards have again been worsted, and
whatever counsel such men counselled, the Lord will
scatter.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The stripes of the Fathers, the blood shed by their blows have truly
ceased; continuous exiles are no more, and peace is being established
for all. No longer does the work of magic have force; for Â‘God is with
usÂ’.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The vine of evil spread out its branches of impiety and flowered with
the bitter grape cluster, and their wine was the rag of the dragon, from
which they truly gave the LordÂ’s people the evil-minded
drink.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[They defiled your Temple with unlawful ordinations for money, and they
have been canonically cast out and are fallen from divine glory: Simon
Magus, and with him John and Antony.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Against the wild beasts and enemies of God, foul Antony, the traitor,
John, of satanic mind and enemy of the Church, assembled like fierce
wolves, let us believers shout out three times,
Â‘Anathema!Â’.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[O uncreated Monarchy, Father, Son and Spirit, we worship you, whose
praise the many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim sing, as they
cry, Â‘Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O Highest and
Almighty!Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Holier than the holies, higher than all creatures you were named, O
Virgin Mother, who bore your own Creator; therefore we offer worship to
your holy form, O Birth-giver of God.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Ode 5.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}[Rising in the
night]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Christ has conquered! Let earth leap for joy! Tumult has ceased; the
weeping of the LordÂ’s servants too has ceased; while everywhere the
Faith has been unfurled for the world.
\[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Seeing the Crucifixion in an Icon, we love it with reverence, greeting
Christ and his symbols, and we worship them, but do not honour them as
gods.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The garrulous and blasphemous spirit of Lyzikos has ceased, that
continually by day and night spoke out against the divine image of
Christ and his Saints.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Why, thrice wretched man, do you hate the immaculate image of ChristÂ’s
incarnation and of all the Saints? For surely we believers do not
worship dumb idols, do we?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Lighting on instruments of impiety, they assembled a synod of impious
priests against God most high, like the Jews, Annas and Caiaphas, of
old.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

On the day of judgement, most wretched man, the company of the Fathers
will stand as accusers of your godless soul; the Fathers who flesh you
stripped bare with unnumbered blows.

[All the Churches will shout aloud, crying that they were all deprived
by you of the image of the Lord and of his Saints, the holy
Icons.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory to you who sustain the universe by your might! Glory to you,
Unity in Three Persons, Father, Son and Spirit, deliver from harm of
every kind those who believe in you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[We reverence you, Sovereign Lady and Virgin, as the beauteous golden
lamp that gave birth for the world to the spiritual light and diminished
the misty fog.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Ode
6.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}[ I cried from my whole
heart]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}

[The unsleeping guardians of ChristÂ’s Church cried out, asking him that
she be given peace. He heard and was attentive to their prayer.
\[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The game traps of the deceiver have been exposed by the teachings of
the Fathers, and God, who is uncircumscribed in his Godhead, formed in
flesh is praised.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

Fellow workers of error, be ashamed! And let Theodotos and Lizix and
Theodore, that abyss of destruction, be destroyed with Antony.

[You opened your mouth, you wretch, not in spiritual songs, but in
blasphemies against your Master, rejecting the honourable fashioning of
Icons.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[You overthrew the doctrines of the Fathers and the teachings of the
Apostles, writing against them in accordance with your lawless cult,
John, enemy of Christ.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The smoke of your tears filled the eyes of the devout; but with the
wind of the godly Teachers they have been dispersed, demented
John.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[You ripped apart the divine robe, like Arius of old ChristÂ’s tunic,
therefore you have been cast out of the Church like a
dog.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[I glorify one source of Godhead in three hypostases; for God is one,
Father, Son and Spirit; though distinct in characteristics and
persons.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}**]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Prophetically, Pure Maiden glorified by God, you were revealed as City
of God, from which your Maker was born, preserving you after
childbearing as you were before.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Ode
7.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}[ We have sinned, we have
offended]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}

[Divine grace has now quenched the furnace of heresy, consuming the
spiritual Chaldeans, bedewing the servants of the Trinity, who had been
held in its flames for four weeks of years.
\[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The Church is adorned, robed, made fair with the form of the Master of
all things, of his incarnation and sufferings, bearing their symbols to
the end, in accordance with GodÂ’s laws.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The LordÂ’s people that bears ChristÂ’s name celebrates, keeps
festival, seeing the Church once again resplendent with the beauty of
the divine form, which, though being God, he bore as human in order to
save us.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[In flesh the Word was poor and hungry and thirsty, these being the
attributes of the human nature, through which he is circumscribed;
though in hid Godhead he is simple and
uncircumscribed.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

The monstrosities and wizardries of the enemy of Christ have been
destroyed, for he has been revealed as equal of the Greeks, inflated by
their writings, which the voices of the just have utterly destroyed.

[What tongue will recount your most damaging and soul destroying
doctrines or the utterance of your belly, falsely named John and
forerunner of the Antichrist Satan?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[There was no need for you to be so named, but rather Pythagoras,
Chronos, and Apollo, whose manner of life you rivalled, delighting in
your impieties.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Eternal, all-powerful, beyond understanding; we believers all worship a
Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, and let us confess them without
confusion as we cry, Â‘Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O
God!Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

Sure Bridge for Christians, the boast of the faithful and their refuge;
Sovereign Lady, Mother of God, you alone are she that helps all and
saves them from dangers.

[Ode 8.]{style="color:red"} Whom the armies of Heaven.

Believers, let us all rejoice like the prophets and let us mystically be
glad, for this is the day on which Christ the Word gave back to the
Church his own robe.

[Lezix and John, the yoke of Beliar, ranged themselves in serried ranks
as for against ChristÂ’s image, assaulting the Church with axe of
wickedness. ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Who would not grieve on seeing the outrageous act of daring, the divine
image over the Bronze gate of the palace, stoned by lawless men on
JohnÂ’s instruction.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[How do you not understand, blind wretch, darkened in mind, when you see
that all under heaven has been adorned with ChristÂ’s imprint; but alone
you had the understanding of the Jews?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[You thought you would utterly destroy the incarnate Image of the Lord
and all the saints from the holy Churches; but divine grace has
destroyed your tyranny.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Dread Lezix, along with John, the deniers of true religion, lawlessly
said they would in no way worship the sacred relics of the saints and
their Icons.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

As we all devoutly reverence the all-creating Divine Power in three
Forms, the Father who has no beginning, the Word and the Spirit that
shines out with them, let us glorify to the ages.

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Sure bridge of Christians, boast of the faithful and their refuge,
Sovereign Lady and Mother of God, you alone help all and save them from
dangers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Ode
9.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red"}*[ ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}*[Conception without
seed]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:Odyssea"}

[Nations, clap your hands; choirs of Father, hurry; Ascetics and those
in the mountains, come together; you, that of old were persecuted by
John the impious deceiver, have come publicly to heap scorn on wizardry
and spells. \[[Twice]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Desert, rejoice, with the whole inhabited world; all you mountains,
drop down sweetness; hills, be glad, for Christ, the Word, has given
peace to those on earth, and to the godly Churches unity of
faith.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The God of just sentences has now pronounced with freedom; Christ has
appeared, giving strength today to godly Teachers to proclaim boldness
his condescension and to depict with sureness his incarnation in
icons.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Longsuffering Lord, how wonderful are your works! Who will number your
love for[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}humankind? Who, when they see
your Priests and Ascetics slain for the sake of your Icon, would not
burn up the deceivers? But you, when insulted,
endured.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Lord, who fixed the Church unshaken Â– and the gates of Hell did not
prevail Â– grant your peace to your people, that we may all sincerely
worship you with a single hymn of glory and glorify
you.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Let all who do not honour the imprint of your embodying, Master, stand
under anathema; above all John, with Antony and impious Theodore,
Theodotos and all the rest of the opponents of the
Faith.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Master, who gave your peace to your Apostles, now too grant your calm
to all, with your hand gathering the scattered, and number them as
rational sheep in the sheepfold of your holy Church.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[I glorify the Godhead of Father, Son and Spirit, the One Nature in
Three Hypostases. Essence Undivided, Separate in Persons, one single
kingship, almighty sovereignty that holds the universe in
being.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Both now.
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Help, protection and assistance[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}of all, O
Mother of God, show that you can intercede for all those who take refuge
in you and that you drive away the impious by the power of your Son; for
as Mother you can do all things.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[And when we reach the appointed place, we say the
Troparion:]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}

[We worship your most pure IconÂ…]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Glory. Both now. [Another. Tone
2]{style="color:red"}*.*]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The choir of the Prophets gladly rejoices today with Moses and Aaron,
because the Cross, bringing the end of prophecy, shines out, by which
you saved us. At their intercessions, Christ our God, save our
souls.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
