\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](july1.md) \] \[ [July 5](july_5.md) \]
\[ [20 July](20july.md) \] \[ [22 July](22july.md) \] \[ Holy Fathers \]

[NOTE]{style="color:red"}

*[On the 13th of the present month, if it falls on a Sunday, or on the
first Sunday following, is sung the Office of the 630 Holy and
god-bearing Fathers of the 4th Holy and Ecumenical Council, of the year
451, under the Sovereigns Marcian and Pulcheria, which was summoned
against the Monophysites Eftyches and Dioskoros. The Office is a
composition of the most holy Patriarch of Constantinople Philotheos, who
flourished around the middle of the 14th century.]{style="color:red"}*

[On the Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the 4th Ecumenical Council, who
assembled in
Chalcedon.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-weight:normal"}

[AT VESPERS]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-weight:normal"} {#at-vespers style="tab-stops:36.0pt" align="center"}
========================================================

[The usual reading from the Psalter. At]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[ Lord,
I have cried[ we insert 10 Stichera, and sing 3 of the Resurrection from
the Octoichos, 3 by Anatolios and the 4 following Prosomia of the Holy
Fathers.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}

[Tone 6. Having invested
all.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal"}

[The revered gathering of the wise Fathers proclaimed you, O Lover of
mankind, the uncircumscribed and indescribable Word who became flesh for
our sake, to be perfect God and perfect man, double in natures and
energies and wills;[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1} one and the
same by hypostasis; therefore knowing you to be one God with the Father
and the Spirit, we worship you as we call the Fathers
blessed.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Glorious Fathers, you overthrew Pyrrhus[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2} and
Sergios,[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3} with
Honorius,[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}
Eftyches,[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5}
Dioskoros[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6} and dread
Nestorios,[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7} saving
ChristÂ’s flock from both sheer cliffs by radiantly proclaiming Christ
one by hypostasis, but double in natures, revealed by energies alone; as
we also worship him as man and perfect God, with the Father and the
Spirit, we now glorify you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The God-bearing Fathers with one accord proclaimed to be uncreated the
divine energy and the divine will of the One who became a beggar, as
they allotted my humanity to the flesh, while the blessed Saints wisely
fled from the createdness of the energy and will, the confusion of
nature and the separation of the person. We faithful, as we honour them
with yearly festivals, with one accord glorify Christ who glorified
them.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The God-bearing Fathers with one mind today proclaimed the uncreated
Trinity to be one God and Lord, fittingly demonstrating to all the
simplicity of the one nature,[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8} with common
will and simplicity of energy, making him known through all things as
without beginning and without end; therefore we sing their praise all as
imitators of the Apostles and all teachers of their
Gospel.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Glory.[ **Tone
6.**]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Let us praise today the mystical trumpets of the Spirit, the Godbearing
Fathers, who sang a harmonious melody of theology in the midst of the
Church: one Trinity, unchanging Essence and Godhead; the overthrowers of
error, the champions of the Orthodox, who ever intercede with the Lord
to have mercy on our souls.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Both now. [Theotokion. The 1st of the
Tone.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Entrance,]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[ O
Joyful Light, [the ProÂ­keimenon of the day, and the
Readings:]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Reading is from Genesis.\
\[[14:14-20]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Now when Abram heard that Lot his nephew had been taken captive, he
numbered his own home-born servants, three hundred and
eighteen,[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9} and pursued
the enemy as far as Dan. And he fell upon them by night, he and his
servants, and smote them and pursued them as far as Chobal, which is on
the left of Damascus. And he brought back all the cavalry of Sodom, and
he brought back Lot his nephew and all his goods and the women and the
people. And the king of Sodom came out to meet him, after his return
from the slaughter of Chodologomor and the kings with him, to the valley
of Sabi; this was the plain of Kings. And Melchizedek, king of Salem,
brought out bread and wine; he was Priest of God Most High. And he
blessed Abram and said: Blessed is Abram by God Most High, who created
the heaven and the earth. And blessed God is Most High, who has
delivered your enemies into your hand.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[1:8-11 &
15-17b]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel: See, I have delivered the land before
you; go in and inherit the land which I swore to your fathers, to
Abraham and to Isaac and to Jacob, to give it to them and to their seed
after them. And I spoke to you at that time saying: I shall not be able
to bear you alone. The Lord your God has multiplied you, and behold, you
are to-day as the stars of heaven in multitude. May the Lord, the God of
our fathers, multiply you a thousand times more than you are, and bless
you as he said to you. And I took from you wise and understanding and
prudent men, and I set them to rule over you, captains of thousands and
hundreds and fifties and tens and recorders for your judges. And I
commanded your judges at that time, saying: Administer justice between
your brethren, and judge rightly between a man and his brother and his
proselyte. You shall not have respect to persons in judging. You shall
hear the small as well as the great. You shall not shrink before any
manÂ’s person; for the judgement is GodÂ’s.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[10:14-18 &
20-21]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel: Behold the heaven and the highest
heaven belong to the Lord your God, the earth and all that is in it.
Moreover the Lord preferred your fathers, to love them: and he chose
their seed after them, you above all nations, as it is at this day. So
circumcise the hardness of your heart and do not be stiff necked. For
the Lord your God is God of Gods and Lord of Lords, the great God,
mighty and awesome, who shows no partiality, who takes no bribe. He
executes judgement for the proselyte, the orphan and the widow; and
loves the proselyte, giving him food and clothing. You shall fear the
Lord your God and serve him, and to him you shall hold fast, and take
oaths in his name. He is your boast, he your God, who has done for you
the great and wonderful things which your eyes have
seen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[At the Aposticha, Stichera of the
Resurrection.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\
Glory.[ Tone
3.]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

You became strict defenders of the apostolic traditions, Holy Fathers,
for correctly teaching that the Holy Trinity was consubstantial, you
overthrew in council the blasphemy of Arius. After him you also refuted
MakeÂ­donios, the opponent of the Spirit, you condemned Nestorios,
Eftyches and Dioskoros, Sabellios and the Leaderless Severos. Ask that
we, deÂ­livered from their error, may preserve our life unspotted in the
faith, we beg.

[Both now.
[Theotokion]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[By the will of the Father you conceived from the holy Spirit, without
seed, the Son of God, who is from the Father without mother before the
ages. But when for our sake he had come from you without father, you
bore him in the flesh and suckled him as a babe. Therefore do not cease
to intercede that our souls may be delivered from
dangers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Resurrection Apolytikion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Glory. [Of the Fathers. Tone
8.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You are glorified above all, Christ our God, who established our
Fathers as beacons on the earth, and through them guided us all to the
true faith. O greatly compassionate, glory to
you!]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Both now.
[Theotokion]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*.*]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You were born for us from a Virgin and endured crucifixion, Good Lord;
by your death you despoiled death, and revealed resurrection as God; do
not despise those whom you fashioned with your own hand; show your love
for mankind, O Merciful; accept the Mother of God who bore you, as she
intercedes for us, and save, O Saviour, a people in
despair.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

<div
style="border:none;border-bottom:double windowtext 2.25pt;padding:0cm 0cm 5.0pt 0cm">

[And Dismissal]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

</div>

**[AT MATINS]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-weight: normal"}** {#at-matins style="margin-top:12.0pt;tab-stops:36.0pt" align="center"}
========================================================================

[The usual reading from the Psalter and the Canons. That of the
ResÂ­urrection to 4, of the Mother of God to 2 and of the Fathers to
8.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The two canons of the Fathers, the acrostic of the first
is:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\
I hymn the skilful purgers of
error.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[In the Theotokia:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\
Philotheos.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 1. Tone 1.\
Your victorious right hand]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}

[Master, as I propose to sing the praise of the skilled demolishers of
error, I call on your almighty grace from on high, and on your force;
for you are indeed the right hand and power of the
Father.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Following the words of the sacred Prophets and the laws of the Gospels,
the wise Fathers taught us clearly the known and unknown things of God,
and delivered all from error.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

From on high the prophetic choir and the godly company of the Apostles
plainly taught one God in three persons and almighty; whom the holy
Fathers clearly revealed to us.

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[As through GodÂ’s action you conÂ­tained in your womb the Light with
triple lamp, as you are loving, enlighten the hearts of those who
deÂ­voutly sing your praise; for you are light and glory and eternal
salvation.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Second Canon.\
Tone 8. The wonderworking
staff.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The devout gathering of the Fathers, which was welded together against
Eftyches, following and abiding by the teachings of the godlike Father,
Cyril,[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10} truly
defined the Saviour with two undivided
natures.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The three hundred and sixty[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11} most
devout men overthrew the error of Eftyches and the heresy of Severos
when they said: We proclaim Christ in two essences, following the words
of the blessed Cyril.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Anyone who does not proclaim Christ, the Word of the Father, in the two
natures and energies, let them be anathema; for the fourth Council of
the Holy Fathers thus wisely laid down. Therefore let us all call them
blessed.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Glorious things have been spoken of you from generation to generation,
Mary Mother of God, who contained in your womb God the Word, while
remaining pure; and so we all honour you as[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}after God our
protection.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 3. You that alone.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The first source of blessings, the grace of the Spirit, opened your
mouths as rivers which sweep away error, glorious Fathers, and give the
faithful streams of true religion to drink, the preaching of Prophets
and Apostles.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Wise Fathers, you nobly destroyed all together Sergios and Pyrrhos the
dread champions of heresy, Paul and Peter and Theodore, establishing the
holy Church on the teachings of Apostles and
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The God-bearing Fathers, plainly proclaiming the energy without
beginning of the Godhead without beginning, taught the created energy of
the created addition, preaching Christ as one Son in a duality of
natures.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[We who long to see the rays of the SpiritÂ’s grace and the divine
brightÂ­ness that knows no evening, let us hasten to the source of
grace, the Mother of the Creator; for by her all the best things are
given to the faithÂ­ful.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. You that
established.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[You that without shame pride yourselves on the words of Severos, which
are full of death-dealing poison, may you be ever put to shame and all
depart from the Church, like wolves and ravaging
dogs.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[We worshippers and believers honour the Creator of all and Saviour in
two undivided essences, and double wills and energies; therefore the
error of Severos we utterly repulse.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Come, let us all plainly reject the error of Severos, Eftyches and
Jacob, and with them that of Theodore and Dioskoros; but let us praise
in godly songs the fourth Council of the deÂ­vout
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[**Theotokion.**]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

You have been declared higher than the Cherubim and Seraphim, Mother of
God; for you alone received in your womb the uncontainable God, O
undefiled; and so in hymns, pure Virgin, all we believers call you
blessed.

[Kontakion and Ikos of the
Tone.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Kathisma. Tone 4.\
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[Come
speedily to
help.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-style:normal;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Blessed Fathers, you were truly reÂ­vealed to the world as most
brilliant beacons of ChristÂ’s truth on the earth, melting like wax the
heresies of the blasphemous prattlers, quenching the burning confusions
of the slanderers; and so, as Hierarchs of Christ, interÂ­cede that we
may be saved.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Glory. [The
same.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Both now.[
Theotokion.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Speedily accept our supplications, all-blameless Lady, and bring them
to your Son and God; abolish the troubles of those who have recourse to
you; humble the devices and overthrow the insolence of the godless, who
are in arms against your serÂ­vants.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 4. With foreseeing
eyes.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Wise fathers, making the laws of the Spirit your meditation, you
received the practical laws sent to you from Rome, and unfolding them by
the light of the Spirit, you firmly estabÂ­lished the
Church.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Let us the faithful garland with hymns the divine assembly of the
God-bearÂ­ing Fathers, for they proclaimed to us the incarnate Word as
both God and man, with two energies and two corÂ­responding
wills.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[All-wise Fathers, you rightly overÂ­threw Honorius, once greatly puffed
up on the throne and rule of old Rome, and finally proclaimed him
unworthy of both throne and rule.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[O Virgin, who gave birth,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}to the empersonned Word of God and true Light; open the eyes of my
soul, I pray, and make me a partaker of the brightness that comes from
him; for you are his mediator and advocate.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. You, Lord, are my
strength.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Explain to us, insane and foolish Severos, how the light without
beÂ­ginning, the Word and Son of the Father is one composite nature; for
if you spoke thus, you would signify another nature; for the flesh and
the Word are not one essence, wretch, but two.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[In saying one incarnate nature of the Word, the teacher and chief of
the Alexandrians propounded a human nature wholly without change and
confusion, clearly teaching the two natures and wills to those who wish
to think as orthodox.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[All we the faithful proclaim two naÂ­tures of Christ unconfusedly,
denouncing utterly all the impiety of Eftyches and the senseless
Dioskoros, as we follow the definition of the Holy Fathers and the words
of godÂ­like Cyril.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[You, Mother of God, are the CheruÂ­bim chariot; you the place and you
the dwelling of the FatherÂ’s Word and God, who put on flesh from your
immaculate womb; and so as we worship him who was incarnate from you in
two essences, we glorify him.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 5. Christ who
enlightened.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Christ declared you, God-bearing Fathers, to be lawgivers guiding the
new Israel, like Moses, and like him drowning the hostile Pharao in the
dread deep of destruction.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[How excellent and radiant the Synod of the Fathers! For having learned
that Jesus is one, yet composite, it proclaims to all the ends of the
earth that as God and man his energies are
double.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Reckoning the writings from Rome to be a gift from God, the wise
Teachers established upon them the tower of true religion, proclaiming
the energies and natures of Christ to be
double.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Paul and Peter have been refuted, together with Theodore, with Pyrrhus,
Sergios and Honorius, who most shamefully maintain the confusion of
ChristÂ’s natures by the confusion of his
energies.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Maiden, you are all enlightenment and radiance, for you were declared
to be the sacred enclosure of the unsetting enlightenment; therefore I
beg, Mother of God, enlighten the eyes of my soul with your
light.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. Why did you thrust
me.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Lawless Severos, do not dreadfully confound the natures of Christ; for
all the worshippers and all-blessed Teachers in their preaching have set
forth Christ in two natures and one person.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Word of the Father without beginning, as he loves mankind and
wished to take pity on us who had perished, clearly assumed human
nature; therefore I proclaim him to have two essences and
wills.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The fourth Council condemned Severos and Dioskoros, who blasphemed
Christ, by confirming the Tome of Leo, Bishop of Rome, who most
excellently defined the two naÂ­tures of the Saviour without
division.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Having obtained a motherÂ’s boldness towards your Son, O All-pure, do
not disregard our natural intention, we beg; for we Christians put you
alone forward to the Master as a kindly
appeasement.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 6. The monster from the
deep.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The truly dread assembly uttered a strange and new confounding of the
natures of Christ, confounding the double energies into an energy one
and monstrous; which the fullness of the holy orthodox regions
rejected.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[That it might escape the dread Nestorios, who wickedly introduced a
duality of sons, the assembly of error slid from the mire into the pit,
vainly teaching a confusion of wills and natures; but it was refuted by
the godlike Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Son, whom the Fathers of old had proclaimed as consubstantial with
the Father and the Spirit, the assembly of inspired Teachers taught all,
with divine energies acknowledging one natural energy and
will.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The champions of error, thinking the will to be hypostatic, wickedly
introÂ­duced along with the wills the persons of those who willed: the
Fathers, excellently refuting them, teach that the energy which is
appropriate to it is congenital with the
nature.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[All-blameless Lady, you have become the door of the divine ray and
source of the unsetting light; for all the fullÂ­ness of the Godhead
dwelt ineffably in your womb; you reward with his natural energy and
radiance those who crave.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. Have mercy on me,
Saviour.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The two letters of Cyril, once sent to Succensus, the leader of the
East, refute all the error of Severos, as they devoutly proclaim
Christ.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Cyril proclaims Christ with two natures and double energies, routing
the heresy of the senseless Severos; therefore we all abide by his
teachÂ­ings.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[We orthodox proclaim you, Mary, to be in truth Virgin and pure Mother
of God, thus shutting the ill-famed mouth of Nestorios and the wicked
notion of Dioskoros.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Kontakion. Tone 8. Model
melody.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The preaching of the Apostles and the teachings of the Fathers
conÂ­firmed for the Church the faith as one; and wearing a tunic of the
truth, woven from the theology on high, she rightly defines and
glorifies the great Mystery of true religion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Ikos.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Let us listen to the Church of God as she cries with exalted
proclamation: Any who thirst, let them come to me and drink; the mixing
bowl I bear is the mixing bowl of wisdom. This drink I have mixed with
the word of truth; I do not pour out water of contradiction but of
confession, which the present Israel drinks and sees God who declares:
See, see that it is I, and I am not changed. I am God first, and after
this, and but for me there is no other at all. Those who partake from
here will be multiplied and will praise the great Mystery of true
religion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Synaxarion of the day,
then:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[On the same day, Commemoration of the holy six hundred and thirty
God-bearing Fathers of the fourth Holy and Ecumenical Council of
Chalcedon.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Verses.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\
Stars of the spiritual sky now bearing light\
My mind do you enlighten with your
rays.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[At the intercessions of the holy Fathers, O God, have mercy on us.
Amen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 7. We faithful know
you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Acknowledging you the Son of God and Son of man, the choirs of
theologians of old proclaimed you, Master who love mankind, as double in
wills and energies, confident in the duality of your two
natures.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You appeared as a bright adornment of the Church, for you received the
ordinances of the Apostles and taught all the word of truth: one Lord in
Trinity, creating, acting, willing,
all-powerful.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Acknowledging God to be uncreated light and immortal life, beyond these
you excellently proclaimed him to all, knowing the natural properties
lower[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}than nature to at once co-natural
and undivided.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Christ sent you out into the world as lightning flashes of divine light
utterly burning up the creators of error, enlightening all the blessed
Church, glorifying God, praised and
all-powerful.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Christ, the highly exalted, the light that knows no evening came forth
from your womb and saved the world of old. Implore him, Mother of God,
to enlighten the spiritual eyes of my darkened
heart.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. The fire in
Babylon.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Confessing Christ to be in two natures and energies without confusion
and without change, we reject the error of Severos. Therefore we cry to
him who underwent suffering by the assumption of the flesh: Blessed is
the God of our Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[We know that he on the Cross and he in the bosom of the Father is one,
as God in the highest and in the grave as united to flesh. To whom with
one accord we sing as we cry: Blessed is the God of our
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Believers, hating the emptying and division of Areios, the diminisher
of God, and again the fellow heresy of Sabellios, those enemies of the
TrinÂ­ity, we cry: Blessed is the God of our
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Of the Trinity.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[We proclaim you Lord of all teaching with right belief that you are
Father of one only Only-begotten Son and acknowledging one right Spirit,
proÂ­ceeding from you, equal in nature and
co-eternal.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 8. In the furnace IsraelÂ’s
Youths.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The Fathers, moving out, as from head-quarters, from[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}the inspired teaching of the Apostles and
Prophets, proclaimed: Christ, the Lord of all, is one in person, double
in natures, double in energies.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Wholly to banish every shameless error and blasphemy the Fathers of the
Church proclaimed that the Lord possessed uncreated energy and will
proper to his nature, and again created, as Man and as
Creator.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Holding in their hands the word of God like a sword you wholly
conÂ­founded the enemies of true religion as you declared the energy and
will of the Saviour and likewise all that was natural to him to be
double, just as his natures.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[You are wholly Maiden, wholly fair, wholly formed of light,
light-bearing and god-bearing, wholly unique and resplendent; therefore
enlighten the eyes of my heart, Sovereign Lady, as I breathe forth your
glory and am wounded with longing for you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. The Chaldean
tyrant.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Let faces be ashamed and the mouths be muzzled of those who do not
proclaim one Son in two natures without division, without change and
without confusion; for we orthodox all agree in holding that Christ acts
and wills not indeed by one and then another person, but in accordance
with both natures.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You that bear the name of Jacob the Patchwork, inscribing his name on
yourÂ­selves, tell us plainly: Were you of old baptised in his
appellation in the font? Therefore, having deserted Christ for that
manÂ’s sake, like him you rave, being clearly without
shame.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The fourth Council in Chalcedon overthrew the dread Dioskoros, Eftyches
and Severos, finally thrusting out of the Church of Christ the Master
their thorny error that conÂ­founds the natures of the Saviour. Holding
to right belief with it, let us then hate
them.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Of the Trinity]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The Godhead of triple light, shining out with a single beam from one
three-personned nature, Begetter without beginning, Word of the FaÂ­ther
identical in nature and Spirit equal in kingship and consubstantial, you
Youths bless, you Priests praise, you people highly exalt to all the
ages.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Ode 9. The burning bush.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Having in yourselves, blessed Fathers, Christ who of old spoke the
things of God, and being now united purely to the Pure, establish his
Church, which you truly made firm by mighty sweat and
toils.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You have become a type and rule for the whole Church of the
thrice-blessed Trinity, teaching it to acknowledge as divine the
incarnation of Christ, prophetically driving out the present blasphemy
concerning the one uncreated Godhead.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You rightly abolished the whole bulÂ­wark of impiety, holy Fathers, by
teaching the difference of energy and fittingly declaring it to be
natural, undivided, uncreated and all-effecting and
all-powerful.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[You became the mouth God, O Saints, and proclaimed, as is right, that
the One who is by nature unapproachable is communicated by enÂ­ergies
and radiances alone.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[You are a golden flourish and godly conclusion to my song, O
All-praised. Returning from flight, I have offered it to your Son,
revered Lady, as a prayer of thanksgiving, uniting with it my hymn to
you, All-pure, as you are cause of blessings.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Another. At this heaven was
amazed.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Crafty Severos passed through the unsullied Church and by the vote of
the devout Fathers he justly received the penalty for his blasphemy and
babble, and condemned he is thrown out of the company of the
Teachers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Why do you confound the natures of Christ and introduce mixture and
blending, attaching the passion of the Cross and the burial to the
impassible Godhead of the Only-begotten Word of God, wretched Severos?
Therefore we abominate your appalling
blasphemy.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Creator born from a Virgin, hurl down the arrogance and insolence of
the hostile and the counsels of the heretics; but as God establish the
company of the faithful unshaken, exalting their horn and strengthening
them by faith, that we may all magnify you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Resurrection Exapostilarion and then the following of the
FaÂ­thers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Women
hear.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}*[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}*

[As today we feast the memory of the godlike Fathers, we pray you, Most
Compassionate, at their intercessions: Deliver your people, Lord, from
all harm of heresies, and count us all worthy to glorify Father, Word
and all-holy Spirit.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Theotokion]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[With the two wills and natures, All-blameless, but with one person you
gave birth ineffably to God, who for our sake willingly made himself
poor, even to a Cross, and granted us the grace of the wealth of his
Godhead by his Resurrection from the dead.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[At Lauds we sing 4 Stichera of the Resurrection and 3, Prosomia, of the
Fathers, doubling the first.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Tone 6. Having invested all.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Having welded together all spiritual knowledge, and examined together
by the Divine Spirit the heavenly and revered Creed, the revered Fathers
under GodÂ’s inspiration traced it out. In it, clearly following the
teachings of the Apostles, they most distinctly teach that the Word is
without beginning with his Begetter and most surely consubstantial. They
are reÂ­nowned, truly all-blessed and
godly-minded.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}*[Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our
Fathers.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Having received the spiritual brilliance of the Holy Spirit, and
divinely inspired, the good heralds proclaimed the supernatural oracle,
brief in words, but rich in meaning; the blessed defenders of Gospel
teachings and the godly traditions, whose revelation they clearly[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}received from on high, and, enlightened,
they set forth the Faith taught them by God.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}*[Gather to him his Holy Ones, those who have .set forth his
covenant.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

Having collected together all their skill as shepherds, and stirred up
their most just anger, the godly Shepherds, as ChristÂ’s truest
servants, the most sacred initiates of the inspired procÂ­lamation, most
justly drove off the fierce and ravening wolves with the sling of the
Spirit, having cast as from a sling from the body of the Church those
fallen as though sick of a deadly and incurable sickness.

[Glory. [**Tone
8.**]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The choir of holy Fathers, having hurried together from the ends of the
whole world, proclaimed the doctrine of the one essence and nature of
FaÂ­ther, Son and Holy Spirit, and clearly delivered to the Church the
mystery of the divinity. Praising them with faith, let us call them
blessed as we say: O godly host, inspired warriors of the LordÂ’s
battle-line; brightly shining stars of the spiritual firmaÂ­ment;
impregnable towers of the mystical Sion; sweet-scented flowers of
Paradise; pure golden mouths of the Word; NiceaÂ’s boast, the whole
worldÂ’s ornament, intercede insisÂ­tently on behalf of our
souls.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Both now. You are most
blessedÂ…]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Great Doxology and
Dismissal.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt;color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
In fact the doctrine of the two wills and Â‘energiesÂ’ in Christ was
only defined at the 6th Council at Constantinople in
681.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
Monothelite Patriarch of Constantinople from 638-641 and for the first
six months of 654.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
Patriarch of Constantinople from 610-638. Propounded the doctrine of Two
Natures but only one mode of activity,
]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}[*energeia*]{style="font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}[,
in Christ. He was the author of the *Ekthesis* which put it forward. His
doctrine was condemned in
681.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
Pope of Rome from 625-638. In a letter supporting Patriarch Sergios he
used the expression Â‘one willÂ’ in speaking of Christ. This doctrine of
Â‘MonothelitismÂ’ was condemned and Honorius anathematised at the
Council of 681.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
Archimandrite of a monastery in Constantinople, he taught that there was
only one nature in Christ Â‘after the unionÂ’ .This doctrine of
Monophysitism was condemned at the 4th Council of Chalcedon. He also
taught ChristÂ’s human nature was not consubstantial with
ours.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
St CyrilÂ’s successor as Patriarch of Alexandria from 444-451, he
supported the doctrine of Monophysitism. He was deposed at the Council
of Chalcedon.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7}[
Patriarch of Antioch 512-518, when he was deposed for denouncing the
Council of Chalcedon as Nestorian. A moderate Monophysite, he condemned
Eftyches. He died in exile in
538.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8}[
This sticheron speaks of the Trinity, not of the incarnate
Christ.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9}[
The traditional number of the Fathers of the 1st Council of
Nicea.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10}[
Patriarch of Alexandria 412-444. Chief opponent of Nestorios at the
Council of Ephesus.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11}[
The traditional number of the Fathers at
Chalcedon.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
