\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyTues.md) \]
\[ [Matins](HWTue-M.md) \] \[ Vespers \]

ON HOLY AND GREAT TUESDAY

VESPERS

****

The priest gives the blessing:

Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and always, and to ages of ages.

****

The appointed monk or the Superior reads the Opening Psalm as follows:

Amen. Come let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.\
Come let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.\
Come let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King and
our God.

****

Psalm 103\

Bless the Lord, my soul! O Lord my God, you have been greatly magnified.
You have clothed yourself with thanksgiving and majesty, wrapping
yourself in light as in a cloak, stretching out the heavens like a
curtain, roofing his upper chambers with waters, placing clouds as his
mount, walking on the wings of the wind, making spirits his Angels and a
flame of fire his Ministers, establishing the earth on its sure base; it
will not be moved to age on age. The deep, like a cloak, is its mantle;
waters will stand upon the mountains. At your rebuke they will flee;
they will quail at the voice of your thunder. The mountains rise and the
plains descend to the place which you established for them. You fixed a
limit that they will not pass, nor will they return to cover the earth.
You send out springs into the valleys; waters will run between the
mountains. They will give drink to all the beasts of the field; the wild
asses will await them to quench their thirst. Beside them the birds of
the air will make their dwelling: and sing among the rocks. He waters
the mountains from his upper chambers; the earth will be filled from the
fruit of your works. He makes grass spring up for the cattle, and green
herb for the service of mankind; to bring food out of the earth, and
wine makes glad the human heart; to make the face cheerful with oil, and
bread strengthens the human heart. The trees of the plain will be
satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon that you planted. There the sparrows
will build their nests; the heron’s dwelling is at their head. The high
mountains are for the deer; rocks a refuge for hares. He made the moon
to mark the seasons; the sun knew the hour of its setting. You appointed
darkness, and it was night, in which all the beasts of the forest will
prowl; young lions roaring to plunder and to seek their food from God.
The sun rose and they were gathered together and they will lie down in
their dens. Man will go out to his labour; and to his labouring until
evening. How your works have been magnified, O Lord. With wisdom you
have made them all, and the earth has been filled with your creation.
Also this great, wide sea; there there are creeping things without
number, living creatures small and great. There ships go to and fro;
this dragon which you fashioned to sport in it. All things look to you
to give them their food in due season. When you give it them, they will
gather it. When you open your hand all things will be filled with
goodness. But when you turn away your face they will be troubled. You
will take away their spirit, and they will perish and return to their
dust. You will send forth your spirit, and they will be created, and you
will renew the face of the earth. May the glory of the Lord endure to
the ages. The Lord will rejoice at his works. He looks upon the earth
and makes it tremble. He touches the mountains, and they smoke. I will
sing to the Lord while I live; I will praise my God while I exist. May
my words be pleasing to him. While as for me, I shall rejoice in the
Lord. O that sinners might perish from the earth, and the wicked, so
that they are no more. Bless the Lord, my soul! ****

And again

The sun knew the hour of its setting: you made darkness, and it was
night. How your works have been magnified, O Lord. With wisdom you have
made them all!

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.\
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.\
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (

**x3**) ****

Litany of Peace

Priest:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And so after each petition.**

Priest:

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.\
For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.\
For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.\
For our Archbishop **N**., for the honoured order of presbyters, for the
diaconate in Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to
the Lord.\
\[For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.\
For our father and superior, Priest-monk **N***.*, and all our
brotherhood in Christ, let us pray to the Lord.\]\
For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful
who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.\
For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.\
For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.\
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.\
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.\
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

After the Litany, the appointed Kathisma of the Psalter is read by one
Reader.

KATHISMA EIGHTEEN

\
**Psalm 119\
A Song of Ascents.**

When I was afflicted I called to the Lord, and he heard me. O Lord,
deliver my soul from unjust lips and from a deceitful tongue. What
should be given you, what added to you for a treacherous tongue? The
sharpened arrows of the powerful, with the coals of desolation. Alas!
For my sojourning has been prolonged, I have camped among the
encampments of Kedar. My soul has long been a sojourner. With those who
hate peace I was peaceable. When I spoke with them, they made war on me
for nothing.

****

Psalm 120\
A Song of Ascents.

I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains. From where will my help come?
My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Do not let your
foot waver. May the One who guards you not slumber. See, the One who
guards Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord will guard you;
the Lord is protection for you on your right hand. By day the sun will
not scorch you, nor the moon by night. The Lord will guard you from
every evil, the Lord will guard your soul. The Lord will guard your
coming in, and your going out, from now and for ever more.

****

Psalm 121\
A Song of Ascents.

I rejoiced at those who said to me, ‘We shall go to the house of the
Lord’. Our feet were standing in your courts, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem
built as a city, shared by all together. For there the tribes went up,
the tribes of the Lord, a testimony for Israel, to give thanks to the
name of the Lord. For there thrones were set for judgement, thrones over
the house of David. Ask then for the things which are for Jerusalem’s
peace, and prosperity for those who love you. May there be peace then in
your power and prosperity in your citadels. For the sake of my brethren
and neighbours, I have spoken peace concerning you. For the sake of the
house of the Lord our God, I have sought good things for you.

****

Psalm 122\
A Song of Ascents.

I have lifted my eyes to you who dwell in heaven. Behold, as the eyes of
servants look to their lords’ hands, as the eyes of a maid to her
mistress’s hands, so do our eyes to the Lord our God, until he take pity
on us. Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy on us, for we have had our
fill of contempt, our soul has been filled to overflowing. Let reproach
be for the prosperous, and contempt for the proud.

****

Psalm 123\
A Song of Ascents.

If the Lord had not been among us, let Israel now say; if the Lord had
not been among us when people rose up against us, they would have
swallowed us down alive. When their fury raged against us, the water
would have drowned us, our soul would have passed through the torrent,
our soul would have passed through irresistible water. Blessed is the
Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul was
delivered like a sparrow from the snare of the hunters. The snare was
shattered, and we were delivered. Our help is in the name of the Lord,
who made heaven and earth.

Glory. Both now.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (

**x3**)

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. ****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. . ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For yours is the might, and yours the kingdom, the power and the glory,
of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Psalm 124\
A Song of Ascents.

Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Sion. One who dwells in
Jerusalem will be shaken for ever. Mountains encircle her, and the Lord
encircles his people from now and for ever. For the Lord will not leave
the rod of sinners upon the heritage of the just, lest the just stretch
out their hands in iniquities. Do good, Lord, to the good and to the
upright in heart. But the Lord will drive away with those who work
iniquity, those who turn aside to extortions. Peace upon Israel.

****

Psalm 125\
A Song of Ascents.

When the Lord turned back the captivity of Sion, we became like those
who are comforted. Then our mouth was filled with joy, and our tongue
with rejoicing. Then they will say among the nations, ‘The Lord has done
great things with them’. The Lord has done great things with us, we have
become joyful. Turn back our captivity, O Lord, like streams in the
south. Those who sow in tears, will reap in joy. They went, and as they
went they wept, while they sowed their seed. But when they come, they
will come in joy, carrying their sheaves.

****

Psalm 126\
A Song of Ascents.

If the Lord does not build the house, the builders have toiled for
nothing. If the Lord does not guard the city, the guard has kept vigil
for nothing. Your getting up at dawn is for nothing, your rising after
sitting, you that eat the bread of sorrow, when he gives sleep to those
he loves, see, sons are the Lord’s inheritance, the reward of the fruit
of the womb. As arrows in the hand of a powerful man, so are the sons of
the rejected. Blessed is one who satisfies his desire with them. They
will not be shamed when they speak with their enemies in the gates.

****

Psalm 127\
A Song of Ascents.

Blessed are all who fear the Lord, who walk in his ways. You will eat
the toils of your fruits. You are blest, and it will be well with you.
Your wife like a luxuriant vine against the sides of your house; your
sons like new olive shoots around your table. See, that is how one who
fears the Lord will be blessed. The Lord bless you from Sion, and may
you see the good things of Jerusalem all the days of your life. And may
you see your children’s children. Peace upon Israel.

****

Psalm 128\
A Song of Ascents.

Many times they have made war on me since my youth, let Israel now say.
Many times they have made war on me since my youth, and yet they have
not prevailed over me. The sinners have wrought upon my back, they have
prolonged their iniquity. The Lord is just, he has broken the sinners’
necks. Let all those who hate Sion be shamed and turned back. Let them
become like grass on the housetops, which withers before it is uprooted.
The reaper has not filled his hand with it, nor the one who gathers the
sheaves his bosom. Nor have the passers-by said, ‘The Lord’s blessing be
on you. We have blessed you in the name of the Lord’.

Glory. Both now.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (

**x3**)

Lord, have mercy. (

**x3**) Glory. Both now. ****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. . ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For you, O God, are good and love mankind and to you we give glory, to
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Psalm 129\
A Song of Ascents

Out of the depths I have cried to you, O Lord. Lord, hear my voice. Let
your ears be attentive to the voice of my supplication. If you note our
iniquities, Lord, Lord, who will survive? Because forgiveness is with
you. For your name’s sake I have waited for you, O Lord; my soul has
waited for your word, my soul has hoped in the Lord. From the morning
watch until night, from the morning watch, let Israel hope in the Lord.
Because with the Lord there is mercy and with him abundant redemption;
and he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

****

Psalm 130\
A Song of Ascents

Lord, my heart has not been exalted, nor have my eyes become lofty, I
have neither walked among great affairs, nor among marvels beyond me. If
I had not been humble-minded, but exalted my soul, like a weaned child
towards its mother, so you will requite my soul. Let Israel hope in the
Lord, from now and for ever.

****

Psalm 131\
A Song of Ascents

Lord remember David and all his meekness, how he swore to the Lord, made
a vow to the God of Jacob, ‘I shall not enter the shelter of my house,
climb into my bed, I shall not give sleep to my eyes, slumber to my
eyelids and rest to my temples, until I find a place for the Lord, a
shelter for the God of Jacob’. See, we heard of it in Ephrata, we found
it in the woodland fields. We shall enter his tabernacles, we shall
worship at the place where his feet have stood. Arise, Lord, into your
rest, you and the ark of your sanctification. Your priests will clothe
themselves with justice, and your holy ones will rejoice. For David,
your servant’s sake, do not turn away the face of your Christ. The Lord
has sworn truth to David, and he will not annul it, ‘From the fruit of
your womb I shall place on your throne. If your sons keep my covenant
and these testimonies of mine which I shall teach them, their sons too
will sit on your throne for ever. For the Lord has elected Sion, has
chosen her as a dwelling for himself. ‘This is my resting-place for age
on age. Here I shall dwell, for I have chosen her. Her door I shall
bless abundantly, her poor I shall satisfy with bread. Her priests I
shall clothe with salvation, and her holy ones will rejoice with great
joy. There I shall make the horn of David flourish. I have prepared a
lamp for my Christ. I shall clothe his enemies in shame, my
sanctification will flower upon him’.

****

Psalm 132\
A Song of Ascents

See how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together; like
sweet ointment on the head, which runs down upon the beard, Aaron’s
beard, which runs down to the hem of his garment; like the dew from
Hermon, which runs down upon the mountains of Sion; for there the Lord
has commanded the blessing: life for ever more.

****

Psalm 133\
A Song of Ascents

Come, now bless the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who stand in the
house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God. Lift up your
hands by night to the Holy Place, and bless the Lord. The Lord bless you
from Sion, he who made heaven and earth.

Glory. Both now.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (

**x3**) ****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For you are our God, a God of mercy and salvation, and to you we give
glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and always and to
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

We begin

Lord, I have cried **in Tone 1.**

Psalm 140

\[

**A**\] Lord, I have cried to you, hear me; hear me, O Lord. Lord, I
have cried to you, hear me. Give heed to the voice of my supplication
when I cry to you. Hear me, O Lord.

\[

**B**\] Let my prayer be directed like incense before you: the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. Hear me, O Lord.

\[

**A**\] Set a guard, O Lord, on my mouth: and a strong door about my
lips.

\[

**B**\] Do not incline my heart to evil words: to make excuses for my
sins.

\[

**A**\] With those who work iniquity: let me not unite with their elect.

\[

**B**\] The just will chastise me with mercy and reprove me: but let not
the oil of sinners anoint my head.

\[

**A**\] For yet my prayer shall be in their pleasures: their judges have
been swallowed up near the rock.

\[

**B**\] They will hear my words for they are sweet: as a clod of earth
is crushed upon the ground their bones have been scattered at the mouth
of Hell.

\[

**A**\] For my eyes look to you, O Lord, my Lord: I have hoped in you,
do not take away my soul.

\[

**B**\] Keep me from the snare that they have hidden for me: and from
the traps of evil-doers.

\[

**A**\] The sinners will fall into their own net: I am alone until I
pass by. ****

Psalm 141

\
\[**B**\] With my voice I cried to the Lord: with my voice I entreated
the Lord.

\[

**A**\] I will pour out my entreaty before him: and tell him all my
trouble.

\[

**B**\] When my spirit was faint: you knew my path.

\[

**A**\] In the way where I walked: they had hidden a snare for me.

\[

**B**\] I looked to my right hand and saw: but there was none who knew
me.

\[

**A**\] Escape is gone from me: and there is none who seeks for my soul.

\[

**B**\] I cried to you, Lord, I said, ‘You are my hope: my portion in
the land of the living.’

\[

**A**\] Give heed to my supplication: for I am brought very low.

\[

**B**\] Deliver me from those who persecute me: for they are too strong
for me. ****

For 10 verses. From the Triodion. We use those sung at Lauds, doubling
the first four.

\[**Modern Greek books often allow for only 6 verses, with none of the
Stichera doubled**\] ****

10.

Bring my soul out of prison: that I may confess your name. ****

Tone 1.

How shall I, the unworthy, enter among the splendours of your saints?
For if I dare to enter the bridal chamber with them, my tunic accuses
me, because it is not a wedding garment, and I shall be cast out bound
by the angels; cleanse, Lord, the filth of my soul, and save me as you
love mankind.

****

9.

The just will await me: until you reward me.

How shall I, the unworthy, enter among the splendours of your saints?
For if I dare to enter the bridal chamber with them, my tunic accuses
me, because it is not a wedding garment, and I shall be cast out bound
by the angels; cleanse, Lord, the filth of my soul, and save me as you
love mankind.

****

Psalm 129

Tone 2.

8.

Out of the depths I have cried to you, O Lord: Lord hear my voice.

Slumbering in sloth of soul, O Bridegroom Christ, I have not obtained a
lamp burning with virtues, and I am likened to the foolish maidens as I
wander at the moment for action; do not shut against me the bowels of
your pity, Master, but shake off my dark sleep and bring me with the
prudent virgins into your bridal chamber, where there is the sound of
those who feast and who cry unceasingly: Lord, glory to you!

****

7.

O let your ears be attentive: to the voice of my supplication.

Slumbering in sloth of soul, O Bridegroom Christ, I have not obtained a
lamp burning with virtues, and I am likened to the foolish maidens as I
wander at the moment for action; do not shut against me the bowels of
your pity, Master, but shake off my dark sleep and bring me with the
prudent virgins into your bridal chamber, where there is the sound of
those who feast and who cry unceasingly: Lord, glory to you!

****

6.

If you, Lord, should mark iniquities: Lord, who will stand? But there is
forgiveness with you. ****

Tone 4.

Having heard, soul, the condemnation of the one who hid his talent, do
not hide the word of God; proclaim his wonders, that multiplying the
gift of grace you may enter the joy of your Lord.

****

5.

For your name’s sake I have waited for you, O Lord: my soul has waited
on your word: my soul has hoped in the Lord.

Having heard, soul, the condemnation of the one who hid his talent, do
not hide the word of God; proclaim his wonders, that multiplying the
gift of grace you may enter the joy of your Lord.

****

Tone 6.

4.

From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch: let Israel
hope in the Lord.

Come, believers, let us work eagerly for the Master; for he gives his
servants wealth; let each of us, according to his measure, multiply the
talent of grace; let one bring wisdom through good deeds; another
perform the ministry of splendour; let a believer share the word with
the uninitiated; and let another distribute his wealth to the poor; so
let us multiply the deposit, and, as faithful stewards of grace, let us
become worthy of the Master’s joy; make us worthy of this, Christ God,
as you love mankind.

****

3.

For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him plentiful redemption: and
he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Come, believers, let us work eagerly for the Master; for he gives his
servants wealth; let each of us, according to his measure, multiply the
talent of grace; let one bring wisdom through good deeds; another
perform the ministry of splendour; let a believer share the word with
the uninitiated; and let another distribute his wealth to the poor; so
let us multiply the deposit, and, as faithful stewards of grace, let us
become worthy of the Master’s joy; make us worthy of this, Christ God,
as you love mankind.

****

2.

Praise the Lord, all you nations: praise him all you peoples.

When you come in glory with the angelic Powers and take your seat, O
Jesu, on the throne of judgement, do not separate me from you, good
Shepherd; for you know the right hand ways, but those on the left are
twisted; do not then destroy me, hardened in sin, with the goats, but
numbering me with the sheep on the right save me, as you love mankind.

****

Psalm 116

\
**1.** For his mercy has been mighty towards us: and the truth of the
Lord endures to the ages.

Bridegroom, lovelier in beauty beyond all mankind, you have invited us
to the spiritual banquet of your bridal chamber, strip my ill-clad form
of faults by participation in your sufferings, and adorning me with the
robe of glory of your beauty show me to be a radiant guest of your
kingdom, as you are compassionate.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 7.**

See, my soul, the Master entrusts you with a talent; accept it with
fear, gain interest for the giver by distributing it to beggars, and
gain the Lord as friend; that you may stand on his right hand when he
comes in glory, and hear his blest voice: Enter, servant, into the joy
of your Lord. Make me, who have gone astray, worthy of this, O Saviour,
because of your great mercy.

****

After the completion of the Verses, the Entrance with the Holy Gospel.

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright! ****

We say

\
THE THANKSGIVING\
AT THE LIGHTING OF THE LAMPS\
**An ancient poem, or, as some say, by the martyr Athenogenes.**

O joyful light of the holy glory of the immortal, heavenly, holy,
blessed Father, O Jesus Christ. Now that we have come to the setting of
the sun and see the evening light, we sing the praise of God, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit. It is right at all times to hymn you with holy
voices, Son of God, giver of life: therefore the world glorifies you.

****

Priest:

Evening ****

Reader:

Prokeimenon. Tone 6. Psalm 131.

Arise, Lord, to your rest: \* you and the ark of your holiness.

****

Verse:

** Lord, remember David, and all his meekness. ****

Priest:

** Wisdom! ****

Reader:

** The reading is from Exodus. ****

Priest:

Let us attend.

\[

**2:5-10**\]

The daughter of Pharao came down to bathe at the river, while her
attendants walked beside the river. She saw the basket among the reeds
and sent her maid to bring it. When she opened it, she saw the child. He
was crying in the basket, and Pharao’s daughter took pity on him, ‘This
must be one of the Hebrews’ children,’ she said. Then his sister said to
Pharao’s daughter, ‘Shall I go and get you a nurse from the Hebrew women
to nurse the child for you?’ Pharao’s daughter said to her, ‘Go.’ So the
girl went and called the child’s mother. Pharao’s daughter said to her,
‘Take this child and nurse it for me, and I will give you your wages.’
So the woman took the child and nursed it. When the child grew up, she
brought him to Pharao’s daughter, and he took became a son to her. She
named him Moses, ‘because,’ she said, ‘I drew him out of the water.’.

****

After the reading:

Priest:

** Wisdom! ****

Reader:

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 132.

See how good and pleasant it is \* for brethren to dwell together.

****

Verse:

Like sweet ointment that runs down upon the beard, Aaron’s beard. ****

Reader:

** Command! ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. The light of Christ shines for all. ****

Reader:

\[

**1:13-22**\]

One day when Job’s sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in
the eldest brother’s house, a messenger came to Job and said, ‘The oxen
were ploughing and the she-asses were feeding beside them, and marauders
fell on them and carried them off, and killed the servants with the edge
of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell you.’ While he was still
speaking, another messenger came to Job and said, ‘Fire fell from heaven
onto the earth and burned up the sheep and the shepherds, and consumed
them; I alone have escaped to tell you.’ While he was still speaking,
another messenger came to Job and said, ‘The horsemen formed three
columns, made a raid on the camels and carried them off, and killed the
servants with the edge of the sword; I alone have escaped to tell you.’
While he was still speaking, another messenger came to Job and said,
‘Your sons and daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother’s house, and suddenly a great wind came across the desert,
struck the four corners of the house, and it fell on your children, and
they are died; I alone have escaped to tell you.’ When he heard this Job
arose, tore his clothes, shaved his head, and fell on the ground and
worshipped the Lord. He said, ‘Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and
naked shall I return there; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away;
as it seemed good to the Lord, so it has come to pass; blessed be the
name of the Lord to the ages.’ In all this Job did not sin before the
Lord, nor with his lips; nor did he charge God with folly.

****

After the reading:

Priest:

Peace to you. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit.

\[

**Priest:** Wisdom!\] ****

Priest:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice. ****

People:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice. ****

Priest

\[**or Reader**\]**:** Lord, I have cried to you, hear me; give heed to
the voice of my supplication when I cry to you. ****

People:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice. ****

Priest

\[**or Reader**\]**:** Set a guard, O Lord, on my mouth; and a strong
door about my lips. ****

People:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice. ****

Priest

\[**or Reader**\]**:** Let not my heart incline to evil words; to make
excuses for my sins. ****

People:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice.

\[

**Priest** \[**or Reader**\]**:** Glory. Both now. ****

People:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice.\] ****

Priest:

Let my prayer be set forth as incense before you… ****

People:

The lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice. ****

Then the Prayer of St Ephrem, once.

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

Reader:

And to your Spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Matthew. ****

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you! ****

Priest:

Let us attend.

\[

**24:36-26:2**\]

The Lord said to his Disciples, ‘But about that day and hour no one
knows, neither the angels of heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
For as the days of NoÃ« were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
For as in those days before the flood they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day NoÃ« entered the ark, and
they knew nothing until the flood came and swept them all away, so too
will be the coming of the Son of Man. Then two will be in the field; one
will be taken and one will be left. Two women will be grinding at the
mill; one will be taken and one will be left. Watch therefore, for you
do not know at what hour your Lord is coming. But know this: if the
owner of the house had known at which watch of the night the thief was
coming, he would have watched and would not have let his house be broken
into. Therefore you also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at
an hour when you do not expect him. Who then is the faithful and prudent
slave, whom his lord has put in charge of his servants, to give them
their food at the proper time? Blessed is that slave whom his lord will
find doing this when he comes. Amen I say to you, he will put him in
charge of all his possessions. But if that wicked slave says in his
heart, ‘My master is delayed,’ and he begins to beat his fellow slaves,
and eats and drinks with drunkards, the lord of that slave will come on
a day when he does not expect him and at an hour that he does not know.
He will cut him in pieces and his portion will be with the hypocrites,
where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Then the kingdom of
heaven will be like this. Ten virgins took their lamps and went out to
meet the bridegroom. Five of them were prudent, and five were foolish.
When the foolish took their lamps, they took no oil with them; but the
prudent took oil in their flasks with their lamps. As the bridegroom was
delayed, all of them became drowsy and slept. But at midnight there was
a shout, ‘See! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him.’ Then all
those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps. The foolish said to the
prudent, ‘Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.’ But
the wise replied, ‘No! there will not be enough for us and for you; you
had better go to the dealers and buy some for yourselves.’ And while
they went to buy it, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went
with him into the wedding banquet; and the door was shut. Later the
other virgins came also, saying, ‘Lord, Lord, open to us.’ But he
replied, ‘Amen I say to you, I do not know you.’ Watch therefore, for
you know neither the day nor the hour. For it is as if a man, going on a
journey, summoned his slaves and handed over his property to them; to
one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one, to each
according to his ability. Then he went away. The one who had received
the five talents went off and traded with them, and made five more
talents. In the same way, the one who had the two talents made two more
talents. But the one who had received the one talent went off and dug a
hole in the ground and hid his lord’s money. After a long time the lord
of those slaves came and settled accounts with them. Then the one who
had received the five talents came forward, bringing five more talents,
saying, ‘Lord, you handed over to me five talents; see, I have made five
more talents.’ His lord said to him, ‘Well done, good and faithful
slave; you have been faithful in a few things, I will put you in charge
of many; enter into the joy of your lord.’ And the one with the two
talents also came forward, saying, ‘Lord, you handed over to me two
talents; see, I have made two more talents.’ His lord said to him, ‘Well
done, good and faithful slave; you have been faithful in a few things, I
will put you in charge of many; enter into the joy of your lord.’ Then
the one who had received the one talent also came forward, saying,
‘Lord, I knew that you were a harsh man, reaping where you did not sow,
and gathering where you did not scatter seed; so I was afraid, and I
went and hid your talent in the ground. Here you have what is yours.’
But his lord replied, ‘You wicked and lazy slave! You knew, did you,
that I reap where I did not sow, and gather where I did not scatter?
Then you ought to have invested my money with the bankers, and on my
return I would have received what was my own with interest. So take the
talent from him, and give it to the one with the ten talents. For to all
those who have, more will be given, and they will have an abundance; but
from those who have nothing, even what they have will be taken away from
them. As for this worthless slave, throw him into the outer darkness,
where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ When the Son of Man
comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit
on the throne of his glory. All the nations will be gathered before him,
and he will separate them one from another as a shepherd separates the
sheep from the goats, and he will put the sheep at his right hand and
the goats at the left. Then the king will say to those at his right
hand, ‘Come, you that are blessed by my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world; for I was hungry and
you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me to drink, I was a
stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you gave me clothing, I
was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.’ Then
the just will answer him, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and gave you
food, or thirsty and gave you to drink? And when did we see you a
stranger and welcomed you, or naked and gave you clothing? And when did
we saw you sick or in prison and came to you?’ And the king will answer
them, ‘Amen I say to you, just as you did it to one of the least of
these my brethren, you did it to me.’ Then he will say to those at his
left hand, ‘You that are accursed, depart from me into the eternal fire
prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was hungry and you gave me
no food, I was thirsty and you gave me nothing to drink, I was a
stranger and you did not welcome me, naked and you did not give me
clothing, sick and in prison and you did not visit me.’ Then they also
will answer, ‘Lord, when was it that we saw you hungry or thirsty or a
stranger or naked or sick or in prison, and did not serve you?’ Then he
will answer them, ‘Amen I say to you, just as you did not do it to one
of the least of these, you did not do it to me.’ And these will go away
into eternal punishment, but the just into eternal life.’ When Jesus had
finished saying all these things, he said to his disciples, ‘You know
that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be
handed over to be crucified.’

****

After the reading:

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you! ****

[]{#mon23}Priest:

Let us all say, with all our soul and with all our mind, let us say.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Lord almighty, the God of our fathers, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **Three times. And so after the remaining petitions.**

Priest:

Also we pray for our Archbishop **N**.\
\[Also we pray for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the royal
family, her government and all in authority.\]\
Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation,
pardon and forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and
Orthodox Christians, those who dwell in or visit this city and parish,
the wardens and members of this church and their families; \[and for the
servants of God **N. & N.** (**Here he may name those for whom he has
been asked to pray**), and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy
though we are.\]\
Also we pray for the blessed and ever-remembered founders of this holy
church, and for all our brothers and sisters who have gone to their rest
before us, and who lie asleep here in the true faith; and for the
Orthodox everywhere\[, and for the servants of God **N. & N**. (**Here
he may name those for whom he has been asked to pray**), and that they
may be pardoned all their offences, both voluntary and involuntary\].\
Also we pray for those who bring offerings, those who care for the
beauty of this holy and venerable house, for those who labour in its
service, for those who sing, and for the people here present, who await
your great and rich mercy. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. \[**Note, this last in Athonite custom is said only
once.**\] ****

Priest:

For you, O God, are merciful and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Catechumens, pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**To each petition**) ****

Priest:

Believers, let us pray for the catechumens.\
That the Lord will have mercy on them.\
Instruct them in the word of truth.\
Reveal to them the Gospel of righteousness.\
Unite them to his Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.\
Save them, have mercy on them, help them and keep them, O God, by your
grace.\
Catechumens, bow your heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

(**In a low voice**) ****

Prayer for the Catechumens

God, our God, the Creator and Maker of all things, who wish that all
should be saved and come the knowledge of the truth, look upon your
servants the catechumens and redeem them from the ancient error and the
wiles of the opponent; and call them into eternal life, enlightening
their souls and bodies and numbering them with your rational flock, over
which your holy name has been invoked.

(

**Aloud**) That they also, with us, may glorify your all-honoured and
majestic name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

As many as are Catechumens, depart. Catechumens, depart. As many as are
for Enlightenment, draw near. Those who are for Enlightenment pray to
the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**And so after the following petitions**) ****

Priest:

Believers, for our brethren who are preparing for holy Enlightenment,
let us pray to the Lord.\
That the Lord our God may give them strength and power.\
Enlighten them with the light of knowledge and true religion.\
Count them worthy in due time of the bath of rebirth, the forgiveness of
sins and the garment of incorruption.\
Give them rebirth through water and Spirit.\
Grant them the perfection of the Faith.\
Number them with his holy and chosen flock.\
Save them, have mercy on them, help them and keep them, O God, by your
grace.\
Those for Enlightenment, bow your heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

Prayer for those preparing for Enlightenment

Reveal your countenance, Master, to those preparing for holy
Enlightenment and who long to shake off the defilement of sin. Illumine
their understanding; confirm them in the Faith; establish them in Hope,
perfect them in Love; show them to be honourable members of your Christ,
who gave himself as a ransom for our souls.

(

**Aloud**) For you are our enlightenment, and to you we give glory, to
the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

As many as are for Enlightenment, depart. Those who are for
Enlightenment, depart. As many as are Catechumens, depart. None of the
Catechumens. As many as are believers, again and again in peace, let us
pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. ****

First Prayer of the Faithful.

O God, great and to be praised, who by the life-giving death of your
Christ, brought us from corruption to incorruption, free all our senses
from the death of the passions, setting over them as ruler the reason
that is within us. And let our eyes abstain from every evil sight, our
hearing be inaccessible to idle words, our tongues cleansed of unseemly
speech. Purify our lips that sing your praise you, O Lord, make out
hands refrain from base actions and to do only things that are
well-pleasing to you, and make our limbs and our minds secure by your
grace.

(

**Aloud**) For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, Father, Son
and Holy Spirit, now and always, and to ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. ****

Second Prayer of the Faithful

Master, holy and supremely good, we implore you by your rich mercy to be
merciful to us sinners and to make us worth of the reception of your
only-begotten Son and our God, the King of glory. For see, his most pure
Body and life-giving Blood, entering at this present hour, are about to
be placed on this mystical table, invisibly escorted by a multitude of
the heavenly army. Grant us to communion of them without condemnation,
so that, the eye of our mind being illumined through them, we may become
children of light and of the day.

(

**Aloud**) According to the gift of your Christ, with whom you are
blessed, together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now
and ever and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen.

Now the hosts of heaven invisibly worship with us; for see, the King of
Glory enters. See, the perfected mystical sacrifice is being borne in.

****

After the Entrance, during which all prostrate with their faces to the
ground:

With faith and love, let us draw near that we may become partakers of
everlasting life. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

****

Then the Prayer of St Ephrem, once.

Priest:

Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord.

For the precious gifts here set forth and presanctified, let us pray to
the Lord.\
That our God, who loves mankind, having accepted them on his holy,
heavenly and spiritual altar, as a sweet-smelling savour of spiritual
fragrance would send down upon us his divine grace and the gift of the
Holy Spirit, let us pray.\
For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.\
Help us, save, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.

That the whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let
us ask of the Lord.

****

People:

Grant this, O Lord. ****

Priest:

An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies,
let us ask of the Lord.\
Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the
Lord.\
Things good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let
us ask of the Lord.\
That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let
us ask of the Lord.\
A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a
good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.\
Having asked for the unity of the faith and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to
Christ, our God.

\[

**The Hieratikon from Simonos Petra gives the usual petition here:**

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.\]

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

God of ineffable and unseen mysteries, with whom are the hidden
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, who have revealed the service of this
liturgy to us and through your great love for mankind placed us sinners
to offer you gifts and sacrifices for our own sins and for those
committed in ignorance by the people; do you yourself, invisible King,
who do great and unfathomable things, things glorious and marvellous,
which are without number, look upon us your unworthy servants, who stand
at this your holy altar, as at your cherubic throne, on which, through
these dread things here set forth, rests your only-begotten Son and our
God. And , having freed us and your faithful people from all
uncleanness, make holy the souls and bodies of us all with holiness that
cannot be taken away, so that, partaking with a pure conscience, face
unashamed and enlightened heart of these divine Holy Things and being
given life by them, we may be united to your Christ himself, our true
God, who said, ‘One who eats my flesh and rinks my blood abides in me
and I in them’. So that, with your Word, Lord, abiding and dwelling in
us, we may become temples of your all-holy and venerable Spirit,
redeemed from every wile of the devil brought about by deed or word or
in thought. And may we obtain the good things promised us with all your
saints who have been well-pleasing to you from every age.

(

**Aloud**) And count us worthy, Master, with boldness, and without
condemnation, to dare to call upon you, the God of heaven, as Father,
and to say ****

The Superior, or the designated monk:

Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come, your
will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest

(**aloud**)**:** For yours is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, of
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And with your spirit. ****

Priest:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

God, alone good and compassion ate, who dwell in the heights and look
upon lowly things, with your compassionate eye look upon all your people
and guard them and count us all worthy without condemnation to partake
of these your life-giving mysteries. For to you we have bowed our heads,
awaiting from you your rich mercy.

(

**Aloud**) Through the grace and compassion and love towards mankind of
your only-begotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your
all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Let us attend. ****

Priest:

The presanctified Holy Things for the holy. ****

People:

One is Holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father.
Amen. ****

Communion Chant:

Taste and see that the Lord is good. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

****

Priest:

With fear of God, with faith and love, draw near. ****

People:

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. The Lord is God and has
appeared to us. ****

After the people have received Communion:

Priest:

O God, save your people and bless your inheritance. ****

People:

I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall always be in my
mouth. Taste the heavenly Bread and the Cup of life, and see that the
Lord is good. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. ****

Priest:

Now and for ever and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. \[**Or, according to Athonite use:** Amen. **** Amen. Amen. For
forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.\]\
Let our mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that we may sing your
glory, for you have allowed us to share in your holy mysteries. Keep us
in your holiness, as we meditate on your justice all the day long.
Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. ****

Priest:

Stand upright. Having received the divine, holy, spotless, immortal,
heavenly and life-giving dread Mysteries of Christ, let us give worthy
thanks to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. \[**Or, according to Athonite use:** Glory to you, O
God, glory to you.\] ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Having asked that the whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful and
sinless, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to
Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

We give thanks to you God, the Saviour of all things, for all the good
things that you have granted us and for the communion of the holy Body
and Blood of your Christ. And we pray you, Master, lover of mankind,
guard us under the shelter of your wings and grant us to partake of your
holy things until our last breath, for the enlightenment of soul and
body, for inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven.

(

**Aloud**) For you are our sanctification, and to you we give glory, to
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Let us go forth in peace. ****

People:

In the name of the Lord. ****

Priest:

Let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Master Almighty, who with wisdom fashioned all creation, who through
your ineffable providence and great goodness have brought us to those
most holy days for cleansing of souls and bodies, for mastery of
passions, for hope of resurrection; who during forty days gave into the
hand of your servant Moses the Tables in characters divinely traced,
grant us too, O Good One, to fight the good fight, to complete the
course of the fast, to keep the faith unchanged, to crush the head of
invisible dragons, to be revealed a victors over sin, and without
condemnation to attain to the worship of the holy Resurrection.

For blessed and glorified is your all-honoured and majestic name, of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages.

****

People:

Amen. ****

After the prayer behind the Ambo:

Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore. (

**Prostration**)\
Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.
(**Prostration**)\
Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.
(**Prostration**)

Glory. Both now.

****

Priest (in front of the Prothesis):

Lord, our God, who have brought to these most holy days and made us
partakers of your dread Mysteries, join us to your rational flock and
declare us heirs of your Kingdom, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages. Amen.

****

Then, as the Priest distributes the Antidoron,

Psalm 33

\
I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise shall always be in my
mouth. In the Lord my soul will be praised; let the meek hear it and
rejoice. Magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. I
sought the Lord and he heard me, and he delivered me from all my
afflictions. Draw near to him and be enlightened, and your faces shall
not be ashamed. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved
him from all his afflictions. The angel of the Lord will encamp round
those who fear him, and deliver them. Taste and see that the Lord is
good; blessed the man who hopes in him! Fear the Lord, all you his
saints, for there is not want for those who fear him. The rich became
have become poor and gone hungry, but those who seek the Lord will not
be deprived of any good. Come, my children, listen to me, I will teach
you the fear of the Lord. Who is there who wants life, who loves to see
good days? Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from speaking
guile. Turn away from evil and do good; seek peace and pursue it. The
eyes of the Lord are on the just, and his ears towards their
supplication. The Lord sets his face against those who do evil, to
destroy their memory from the earth. The just cried and the Lord heard
them, and delivered them from all their afflictions. The Lord is close
to those who are broken-hearted, and he will save the humble in spirit.
The afflictions of the just are many, but the Lord will deliver them
from them all. The Lord guards all their bones; not one of them will be
broken. The death of sinners is evil. Those who hate the just will go
astray. The Lord will redeem the souls of his servants, and none who
hope in him will go astray.

\[

**Psalm 144**\
I will exalt you, my God, my King; and I will bless your name for ever
and to age on age. Every day I will bless you; and praise your name for
ever and to age on age. The Lord is great and highly to be praised; and
there is no limit to his greatness. Generation after generation will
praise your works; and will declare your power. They will tell of the
majesty of the glory of your holiness; and will recount your wonders.
They will speak of the power of your dread deeds; and will recount your
greatness. They will proclaim the memory of the multitude of your
goodness; and rejoice in your justice. The Lord is compassionate and
merciful; long-suffering and full of mercy. The Lord is good to all; and
his acts of compassion are for all his works. May all your works confess
you, Lord; and all your holy ones bless you. They will speak of the
glory of your kingdom; and tell of your power. To make known your power
and of the glory the majesty of your kingdom to the children of mankind.
Your kingdom is a kingdom for all the ages, and your dominion for every
generation. The Lord is faithful in all his words, and holy in all his
works. The Lord supports all who are falling, and sets upright all who
are broken down. The eyes of all hope in you, and you give them their
food in due season. You open your hand, and fill every living thing with
your good pleasure. The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all
his works. The Lord is close to those who call on him, to all who call
on him in truth. He will do the will of those who fear him, and hear
their supplication and save them. The Lord guards all who love him, and
all sinners he will destroy. My mouth will tell the praise of the Lord,
and let all flesh bless his holy name for ever and to age on age. ****

Psalm 144 forms part of the Grace before Meals in monasteries, and
strictly therefore it should only be read if the meal follows
immediately.

\] ****

Priest:

The blessing of the Lord be upon you, by his grace and love for mankind,
always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you. ****

Reader:

Glory. Both now. Lord, have mercy (**x3**). Holy Master, give the
blessing. ****

And the Dismissal.

Priest:

May he who comes to his voluntary passion, Christ our true God, through
the prayers of his all-pure and holy Mother, by the power of the
precious and life-giving Cross, through the protection of the honoured,
Bodiless Powers of heaven, through the intercessions of the honoured,
glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, John, of the holy, glorious
and all-praised Apostles, of the holy, glorious and triumphant Martyrs,
of our venerable and God-bearing Fathers and Mothers who have shone
forth in the ascetic life, of our Father among the Saints Gregory
Dialogist, Pope of Rome, of the holy and righteous forebears of God,
Joachim and Anna, \[of Saint **N**. (**to whom the Church is
dedicated**), of Saint **N**., whose memory we keep today,\] and of all
the Saints, have mercy on us and save us, for he is good and loves
mankind.

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ, our God,
have mercy on us.

****

People:

Amen. ****

At the Thanksgiving after Holy Communion we say the Apolytikion and
Kontakion of St Gregory Dialogist, Pope of Rome.

Tone 3.

Enriched with a watchful mouth, you were revealed as noble herdsman of
the divine word, Hierarch Gregory; for you became one who manifested the
virtues, showing forth the radiance of justice. Venerable Father,
implore Christ God to grant us his great mercy.

Glory.

**Tone 8. To you my Champion.**

Let us fittingly sing the praise of the Dialogist, harp of the Church
inspired by God and tongue truly possessed by divine wisdom, for
imitating the zeal of the Apostles he followed clearly in their
footsteps, as we say to him, Hail, Father Gregory!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

At the prayers of all your Saints and of the Mother of God, grant us
your peace, Lord, and have mercy on us, for you alone love humankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
