\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](prophetologion.md) \]
\[ [Readings September to November](readings_september_to_november.md) \]
\[ [Readings December](readings_december.md) \]
\[ [Readings for January](readings_for_january.md) \]
\[ Readings February to April \]
\[ [Readings May to August](readings_may_to_august.md) \]

[READINGS FOR
VESPERS]{style="font-size:24.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua";mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";
mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman";color:red;mso-ansi-language:EN-GB;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

FEBRUARY
--------

[2nd. The Meeting of Our Lord and
[s]{style="text-transform: uppercase; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; color: red; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold"}aviour
Jesus
Christ.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; color: red; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[**32**[**. The Reading is from
Exodus**]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; font-style: normal"}.\
[\[[12,51- 13,16 and
selection]{style="color: red; mso-bidi-font-style: italic; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}\][[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; font-style: normal"}]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}

[The Lord spoke to Moses on the day on which he brought the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt, saying, Â‘Sanctify to me every
first-born, first produced that opens every womb among the children of
IsraelÂ’. And Moses said to the people, Â‘Remember this day, on which
you came out of Egypt, from the house of slavery, for the Lord has
brought you out from there with a mighty hand. And keep his law. And it
shall be that when the Lord God brings you into the land of the
Chananites, in the way that he swore to your fathers, you shall set
apart everything that opens the womb; the males to the Lord. But if
after this your son asks you, saying, Â“What is this?Â”, you will say to
him, Â“God brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery, with a
mighty hand. And when Pharao hardened his heart against sending us out,
the Lord slew every first-born in the land of Egypt, from the first-born
of humans to the first-born of animals. This is why I sacrifice
everything that opens the womb; the males to the Lord, and every
first-born of my sons I will redeemÂ”. And it will be for a sign upon
your hand, and immovable before your eyes, because thus said the Lord
the Almighty, Â“All the first-born of your sons you will give me.
\[[Leviticus
12]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}
And it shall be that everyone[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2} who gives
birth to a male child shall circumcise the flesh of its foreskin on the
eighth day. And for thirty three days he will not come into the
sanctuary of God to the Priest, until the days of purification are
completed. And after this he will offer an unblemished yearling lamb to
the Lord for a holocaust, and a young pigeon or turtle dove to the
Priest at the door of the Tabernacle of Witness. Or instead of these he
will offer two young pigeons or two turtle doves. And the Priest will
make atonement for him. \[[Numbers]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\] Because these have been offered to me as
an offering out of all the children of Israel. And I have taken them and
sanctified them for myself in place of the first-born of the Egyptians,
on the day when I smote every first-born in the land of Egypt from human
to beast of burden,Â” said God the Most High, the Holy One of
Israel.Â’[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[**33.**[ The Reading is from the Prophecy of
Isaias]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; font-style: normal"}.\
[\[[6,1-12]{style="color: red; mso-bidi-font-style: italic; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; font-style: normal"}]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}

[In the year that King Ozias died, I saw the Lord, seated on a high and
exalted throne. And the house was full of his glory. And Seraphim stood
around him, the one having six wings and the other having six wings, and
with two they covered their faces and with two the feet and with two
they flew. And one cried to other and they said, Â‘Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord Sabaoth[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}. The whole
earth is full of his glory.Â’ The threshold was lifted up at the voice
with which they cried, and the house was filled with smoke. And I said,
Â‘Woe is me! For I am pricked to the heart, because I, a human being,
and with unclean lips dwell among a people with unclean lips, and with
my eyes I have seen the King, the Lord Sabaoth.Â’ And one of the
Seraphim was sent to me, and in his hand he held a burning coal, which
he had taken with tongs from the altar. And touched my mouth and said,
Â‘See, this has touched your lips and it will take away your iniquities
and cleanse your sins.Â’ And I heard the voice of the Lord saying,
Â‘Whom shall I send? And who will go to this people?Â’ And I said,
Â‘See, here am I. Send me.Â’ And he said, Â‘Go, and say to this people,
Â“You will hear and not understand, and seeing, you will see and not
perceive.Â” For the heart of this people has grown fat, and they have
heard with heavy ears and they have shut their eyes, lest perhaps they
perceive with their eyes and hear with their ears and understand with
their heart and turn back, and I will heal them.Â’ And I said, Â‘Until
when, Lord?Â’ And he said, Â‘Until the cities are deserted from being
inhabited and the houses from there being no people, and the land will
be abandoned as desert. And after this God will remove the people far
away, and those who are left behind will be multiplied on the
landÂ’.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[34.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
color:red;font-style:normal"}[The Reading is from the Prophecy of
Isaias.\
\[[19,1.3-5.12.16.19-21]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}

[See, the Lord will be seated on a light
cloud[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5} and will
come to Egypt and the idols of Egypt will be shaken at his presence and
their heart will be worsted within them. Â‘And their spirit will be
troubled within them, and I will frustrate their counsel and hand Egypt
over into the hands of harsh lords,Â’ says the Lord Sabaoth. And the
Egyptians will drink water that is beside the sea, while the river will
fail and be dried up. Thus says the Lord, Â‘Where now are your wise men?
And let them declare to you and let them say, Â“What has the Lord
Sabaoth planned against Egypt?Â” On that day the Egyptians will be like
women, in fear and trembling in the presence of the hand of the Lord
Sabaoth, which he will bring against them. And there will be an Altar to
the Lord in the country of the Egyptians and a pillar to Lord at its
border. And it will be for a sign for ever to the Lord in the country of
Egypt, because they will cry to the Lord and he will send them a man who
will save them. And the Lord will be known to the Egyptians. And the
Egyptians will know the Lord in that day, and they will offer sacrifice
and gift, and they will vow vows to the Lord and pay
them.[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[24th. First and Second Finding of the Precious Head of Saint John the
Baptist.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ \[[Also 29 August.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[35.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[40:1 and selection]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: Comfort, comfort my people, says God. Priests,
speak to the heart of Jerusalem. Comfort her, because her humiliation
has been completed; for her has sin has been abolished, because she has
received from the LordÂ’s hand double for her sins. A voice of one
crying in the wilderness: Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight the
paths of our God. Every valley will be filled and every mountain and
hill made low; what is crooked will become straight, and the rough ways
will be made smooth; and all flesh shall see the salvation of God. Go up
onto a high mountain, you who bring good tidings to Sion; lift up your
voice with strength, you who bring good tidings to Jerusalem. Lift it
up, do not be afraid. I the Lord God, I, the God of Israel, will hearken
and will not forsake them; but I will open rivers from the mountains and
springs in the middle of plains. I will turn the wilderness into water
meadows and the thirsty earth with water courses. Let the heavens
rejoice from on high and let the clouds rain justice. Let the earth
sprout and blossom with mercy and justice. Announce a voice of gladness
to the end of the earth and let this be heard: Say that the Lord has
delivered his servant Jacob. And if they thirst through deserts, he will
bring water for them from a rock. Rejoice you barren who have never
given birth, break out and shout, you who have never known birth pangs,
for the children of the deserted are more than those of her who has a
husband.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[36.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from the Prophecy of Malachy.\
\[[3 & 4 and selection]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord Almighty: See, I am sending my Angel, my messenger,
before your face, who will prepare your way before you. And the Lord
whom you seek will come to his temple. And who will endure the day of
his entrance? And who will withstand at his appearing? Because he will
enter like fire in a smelting furnace and like the lye of launderers.
And he will come to you in judgement; and he will be a swift witness
against the wicked and against adulteresses and against those swear
falsely in his name and those who do not fear him, says the Lord
Almighty. Because I am the Lord your God, and I have not changed and
you, children of Jacob, have perverted the laws and not kept them.
Therefore turn back to me and I will turn back to you, says the Lord
Almighty. And all the nations will call you blessed and you will know
that I am the Lord who discern between just and lawless on the day on
which I make a peculiar possession of those who love me. Know then and
remember the law of Moses my servant, as I gave him commandment on
Horeb, to all Israel ordinances and judgements. And see, I will send you
Elias the Thesbite, before the great and manifest day of the Lord comes;
he will turn again the heart of father to son and of a man to his
neighbour, lest when I come I smite the earth grievously, says the Lord
Almighty, God the Holy One of
Israel.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[37.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[[4:7, selection, & 5:1-7]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

A just man if he comes to his end will be at rest. A just man who dies
will condemn the ungodly who are alive; for they will see the end of a
just man and will not understand what they counselled concerning him.
For the Lord will break the ungodly, render them voiceless and cast them
headlong, and he will shake them from the foundations and they will be
utterly worsted in sorrow, and their memory shall perish. They shall
come with fear at the accounting of their sins, and their iniquities
will convict them to their face. Then the just will stand with much
boldness in the face of those who afflicted him and made his toils of no
account. When they see this they will be troubled with great fear and
will be amazed at the wonder of his salvation. For they will say as they
repent and with anguish they will groan and say: Is this he whom we
fools once made a laughing stock and a byword of reproach? We reckoned
his life folly and his end dishonour. How has he been numbered among the
children of God and his lot with the Saints? Therefore we have erred
from the way of truth and the light of righteousness has not shone on us
and the sun has not dawned on us. We have been filled with paths of
lawlessness and destruction and journeyed through trackless paths, but
have not known the way of the Lord.

MARCH
-----

[9th. The Forty Holy Martyrs of
Sebaste.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[38.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[43:9-14]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord:[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}All the nations were
gathered together, and rulers will be gathered out of them. Who will
declare this, or who will declare to you the things from the beginning?
Let them bring their witnesses and let them be justified, and let them
hear and say the truth. Be my witnesses, says the Lord, and I am a
witness and my servant whom I have chosen, that you may know and believe
and understand that I am. Before me there was no other, nor shall there
be any after me.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I am God, and besides me
there is no saviour. I declared and saved, I rebuked, and there was no
strange god among you; and you are my witnesses. I am the Lord God, even
from the beginning; there is none who can deliver from my hand; I shall
work and who will turn it back? Thus says the Lord, God who redeems you,
the Holy One of Israel: For your sake I will send to Babylon and I will
rouse up all who flee and the Chaldaeans will be bound in
ships.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Reading
25.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
26.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[25th. The Annunciation to Our Most Holy Lady, Mother of God and
Ever-Virgin
Mary.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[\[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[And
on other Feasts of the Mother of
God]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\]]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[39.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Genesis.\
\[[28:10-17]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

Jacob went out from the well of the oath and journeyed towards Harran.
And he lighted on a place and slept there, for the sun had set. And he
took one of the stones of the place and put is at his head; and he slept
in that place, and he dreamed. And behold, a ladder set up on the earth,
whose head reached to heaven; and the Angels of God were going up and
going down upon it. But the Lord stood above it and said: I am the God
of Abraham your father, and the God of Isaac, do not be afraid. The land
on which you are sleeping I shall give to you and to your seed. And your
seed will be like the sand of the earth, and it will be spread abroad to
the Sea and Liva and North and East; and in you and in your seed all the
tribes of the earth will be blessed. And behold, I am with you, guarding
you on every road on which you may journey; and I shall bring you back
again to this land, because I shall never abandon you until I have done
all that I have said to you. And Jacob arose from his sleep and said:
The Lord is in this place, but I did not know it. And he was afraid, and
said: How fearful is this place! This is none other than the house of
God, this is the gate of heaven.

[40.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Ezekiel.\
\[[43:72, 44:1]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[It shall be from the eighth day and upwards, the Priests shall make
your holocausts upon the altar, and those for your salvation; and I
shall accept you, says the Lord. And he turned me back by the way of the
outer gate of the Holy Place, which looks towards the east, and it was
shut. And the Lord said to me: This gate shall be shut, it shall not be
opened, and no one shall pass through it, because the Lord, the God of
Israel, will enter through it, and it shall be shut. Therefore this
prince shall sit in it to eat bread. By the way of the Elam of the gate
he shall enter, and by that way he shall go out. And he brought me by
the way of the gate towards the North, opposite the House; and I saw,
and behold the whole house of the Lord was full of
glory.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[41.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from Proverbs.\
\[[9:1]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

Wisdom has built herself a house. She has slaughtered her beasts and
mixed her wine in the mixing bowl, and prepared her table. She her sent
out her servants, to invite with a loud proclamation upon the mixing
bowl: Whoever is foolish, let him turn to me. And to those who lack
wisdom she said: Come, eat my bread, and drink the wine that I have
mixed for you. Abandon folly, and you will live; and seek understanding
that you may have life, and set aright your understanding with
knowledge. One who corrects the wicked will gain dishonour for himself.
One who rebukes the impious will get blame for himself; for to the
impious rebukes are blows. Do not rebuke the wicked, lest they hate you.
Rebuke a wise man and he will love you. Give instruction to a wise man
and he will be wiser; teach a just man and he will increase learning.
The beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and the counsel of
Saints, understanding. While to know the law is the part of a good mind.
For by this means you will live for a long time, and years will be added
to your life.

[41a.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[
The Reading is from Exodus.[[\[8\]\
]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8}\[[3:1-8]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Now Moses was shepherding the sheep of his father-in-law, Jothor, the
priest of Madiam; and he led the sheep to the desert, and came to mount
Horeb. 2 And the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire
out of the midst of the bush; and he saw that the bush was burning, but
the bush was not burned up. And Moses said, Â‘I will turn aside and see
this great sight, why the bush is not being burned up.Â’ When the Lord
saw that he drew near to see, the Lord called to him out of the bush,
Â‘Moses, Moses!Â’ And he said, Â‘What is it?Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then he said, Â‘Do not come near; untie your
shoes from your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy
ground.Â’ And he said, Â‘I am the God of your father, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.Â’ And Moses turned away
his face, for he was afraid to look at God. Then the Lord said to Moses,
Â‘I have seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry because of their taskmasters; I know their suffering,
and I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians,
and to bring them up out of that land to a good and broad land, a land
flowing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanites, the
Hittites, the Amorites, the Pherizzites, the Gergesites, the Hivites,
and the Jebusites.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Reading
2.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

APRIL
-----

**23rd. Holy, Glorious Great Martyr George, Victor and Wonderworker.**

[Reading
37.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
25.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
26.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}*[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*

**25th. Holy Apostle and Evangelist Mark.**

[42. ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[The
Reading is from the Universal Epistle of James\
\[[1:1-12]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve
tribes in the Dispersion: Greeting. Count it all joy, my brethren, when
you meet various trials, for you know that the testing of your faith
produces endurance. And let endurance have its full effect, that you may
be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing. If any of you lacks wisdom,
let them ask God, who gives to all generously and without reproaching,
and it will be given them. But let them ask in faith, doubting nothing,
for one who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed
by the wind. For that person must not suppose that someone
double-minded, unstable in all their ways, will receive anything from
the Lord. Let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation, and the rich in
his humiliation, because like the flower of the grass he will pass away.
For the sun rises with its scorching heat and withers the grass; its
flower falls, and its beauty perishes. So will the rich man fade away in
the midst of his pursuits. Blessed is the one who endures trial, for
when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life which God
has promised to those who love
him.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[43.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Universal Epistle of James\
\[[1:13-27]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, let no one say when they are tempted, Â‘I am tempted by GodÂ’;
for God cannot be tempted with evil and he himself tempts no one; but
each person is tempted when they are lured and enticed by their own
desire. Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin; and sin
when it is full-grown brings forth death. Do not be deceived, my beloved
brethren.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Every good gift and every
perfect gift is from on high, coming down from the Father of lights with
whom there is no variation or shadow of change. Of his own will he
brought us forth by the word of truth that we should be a kind of first
fruits of his creatures. Know this, my beloved brethren. Let everyone be
quick to hear, slow to speak, slow to anger, for a personÂ’s anger does
not work the justice of God. Therefore put away all filthiness and rank
growth of wickedness and receive with meekness the implanted word, which
is able to save your souls. But be doers of the word, and not hearers
only, deceiving yourselves. For if any one is a hearer of the word and
not a doer, they are like a person who observes their natural face in a
mirror; for he observes himself and goes away and at once forgets what
he was like. But those who look into the perfect law, the law of
liberty, and persevere, not being hearer that forget but doers that act,
shall be blessed in their doing. If any one thinks they are religious,
and does not bridle their tongue but deceives their heart, their
religion is vain.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Religion that is pure
and undefiled before God and the Father is this: to visit orphans and
widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the
world.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[44.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Universal Epistle of James.\
\[[2:1-13]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

My brethren, show no partiality as you hold the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For if someone
with gold rings and in fine clothing comes into your assembly, and
pauper in shabby clothing also comes in, and you pay attention to the
one who wears the fine clothing and say, Â‘Have a seat here, please,Â’
while you say to the pauper, Â‘Stand there,Â’ or, Â‘Sit at my feet,Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}have you not made distinctions among
yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Listen, my beloved brethren. Has not God chosen those who are poor
in the world to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom which he has
promised to those who love him?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But you
have dishonoured the poor person. Is it not the rich who oppress you, is
it not they who drag you into court?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Is it
not they who blaspheme that honourable name which was invoked over you?
[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}If you really fulfil the royal law,
according to the scripture, Â‘You shall love your neighbour as
yourself,Â’ you do well.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But if you show
partiality, you commit sin, and are convicted by the law as
transgressors.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For whoever keeps the whole
law but fails in one point has become guilty of all of it.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For he who said, Â‘Do not commit adultery,Â’
also said, Â‘Do not kill.Â’ If you do not commit adultery but do kill,
you have become a transgressor of the law.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So speak and so act as those who are to be
judged under the law of liberty.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For
judgement is without mercy to one who has shown no mercy; yet mercy
triumphs over judgement.

**30th. Holy Apostle James \[Iakovos\], son of Zebedee, brother of John
the Theologian.**

[Reading
41.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
42.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
43.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
This reading is a selection from Exodus 12,51-13,16 together with 22,29
and passages from Leviticus 12 and Numbers 8. The reference to the
purification of the mother in Leviticus is made to refer to the child.
This may be influenced by Luke 2,22, which has Â‘theirÂ’, not Â‘herÂ’,
or, according to the Western text, Â‘hisÂ’. The text in *The Festal
Menaion* is misleading, being from the Hebrew, not the Greek of the
Menaion, which differs noticeably from the
LXX.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
This is masculine, though the LXX has
Â‘womanÂ’.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
This last clause is not from any of the texts used in the reading. The
phrase Â‘God the Most HighÂ’ only occurs at Gen. 14,20 and Psalm 77,35.
The second is characteristic of Isaias, and the two nearest references
are 30,12 & 15. But the whole clause is probably a mere commonplace by
the
compiler.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
Â‘SabaothÂ’ is treated as a divine name by the Fathers, being one of the
words which the translators Â‘did not dare to put into Greek, but left
in HebrewÂ’, according to St Basil, though, as St Gregory the Theologian
says, they knew that it meant Â‘powersÂ’ or
Â‘armiesÂ’]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
A frequent type of the Mother of God in liturgical texts, such as the
4th Irmos of the Canon of the
Akathist.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
Note in the Greek Menaion. Â‘Instead of the above reading, the
manuscripts have another from the prophecy of Ezekiel 43 & 44 \[i.e. the
normal one for the Mother of God\]. While what seems to be the oldest of
the manuscripts has neither it, nor a Liti, nor Kathismata, but only the
Aposticha with one Doxastikon in the same Tone, Â“A light for revelation
of the nationsÂ”, which is to be found at Vespers on the 4th of the
month.Â’]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7}[
The Typika prescribe readings for the Forty Martyrs in addition to the
daily ones from the Triodion, but no references or texts are to be found
in the
Menaion.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8}[
These two readings, for 2nd Vespers, are not found in the
Menaion.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[]{style="font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
