\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](prophetologion.md) \]
\[ [Readings September to November](readings_september_to_november.md) \]
\[ [Readings December](readings_december.md) \]
\[ Readings for January \]
\[ [Readings February to April](Readings%20February%20to%20April.md) \]
\[ [Readings May to August](readings_may_to_august.md) \]

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; color: red"}

READINGS FOR VESPERS
====================

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

JANUARY
-------

****

**1st. The Circumcision of Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Our Father
among the Saints Basil the Great, Archbishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia.**

[1.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}The Reading is from Genesis. \
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[\[[17:1-2, 4^b^- 7,
3^a^,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}9-12^a^,
14]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\][[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

The Lord appeared to Abram and said to him, Â‘I am your God.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Be well pleasing before me and be
blameless.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I will establish my covenant
between me and you, and I will multiply you greatly; and you will be the
father of a multitude of nations.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And your
name will not be Abram, but your name will be Abraham, because I have
established you as father of many nations.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And I will increase you very greatly, and I
will establish you for nations, and kings will come from you.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And I will establish my covenant between me
and you and between your seed after you for their generations as an
eternal covenant, and I will be their God.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And Abraham fell on his face and worshipped
the Lord.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God said to Abraham, Â‘You
are to keep my covenant, you and your seed after you to their
generations.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And this is the covenant
which you are to keep between me and between your seed after you to
their generations.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Every male among you
shall be circumcised; and you shall be circumcised in the foreskin of
your flesh, and it shall be for a sign of the covenant between me and
you.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And every male child among you shall
be circumcised at eight days for your generations.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And an uncircumcised male that is not circumcised in the flesh of
his foreskin on the eighth day, that soul shall be wiped out from its
race; because it has rejected my covenant.Â’

[2]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}The Reading is from Proverbs.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[\
\[[8:22-30]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[The Lord created me the beginning of his ways for his works.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Before time[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2} he established me, in the beginning
before he made the earth.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And before he
made the deeps and before the springs of waters came forth,[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}before the mountains were set firm and
before all the hills he begets me.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The
Lord made countries and uninhabited places and the high inhabited parts
of the earth under heaven.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}When he was
preparÂ­ing the heaven I was present with him, and when he marked out
his throne on the winds.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}When he made the
clouds on high strong and secured the fountains of the earth under
heaven.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}When he gave his command to the sea Â— and the waters will not
transgress his order[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3} Â—, and when
he was strengthening the foundations of the earth, I was by him
arranging all things. I was the one in whom he delighted; while day by
day I rejoiced in his presence at every
moment.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[3]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}The Reading is from the Wisdom of
Solomon.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[\
\[[Proverbs 10:31-32 &
Selection]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\][[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[The mouth of a just man distils wisdom; the lips of men know graces.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The mouth of the wise meditates wisdom;
justice delivers them from death.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}When a just man dies hope is not lost; for a just son is born for
life, and among his good things he will pluck the fruit of justice.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There is light at all times for the just,
and they will find grace and glory from the Lord.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}The tongue of the wise knows what is good, and wisdom will take its
rest in their hearts.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The Lord loves holy
hearts; while all who are blameless in the
way[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5} are
acceptable to him.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The wisdom of the Lord
will enlighten the face of the understanding; for
she[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6} anticipates
those who desire her before they know it, and is easily contemplated by
those who love her.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}One who rises for her
at dawn will not toil, and one who keeps vigil because of her will be
without care.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For she goes about seeking
those who are worthy of her, and shows herself favourably to those on
her paths.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Wickedness will never prevail
against wisdom.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Because of this I too
became a lover of her beauty and became her friend, and I sought her out
from my youth, and I sought to take her as my bride,[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}because the Master of all things loved
her,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}for she is an initiate of the
knowledge of God and one who chooses his works.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Her toils are virtues; she herself teaches sobriety and prudence;
justice and courage,[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7} than which
things nothing is more useful in human life.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}If anyone longs for much experience, she
knows how to compare things of old and those that are to come.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}She knows the twists of words and the
explanations of riddles. She foresees signs and wonders and the outcomes
of seasons and times.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And to all she is a
good counsellor.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Because immortality is in
her, and fame in the fellowship of her words.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Therefore I appealed to the Lord and besought him and said from my
whole heart, Â‘God of my Fathers and Lord of mercy, who made all things
by your Word, and established humanity by your Wisdom to be sovereign
over the creatures that had come into being by you, and to order the
world in holiness and justice, give me Wisdom who sits by your throne,
and do not reject me from among your children, for I am your servant and
the son of your maid servant.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Send her out
from your holy dwelling and from the throne of your glory, that she may
be present with me and teach me what is well pleasing before you.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And she will guide me with knowledge and
guard me with her glory.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For all the
thoughts of mortals are wretched and their ideas are
unstable.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[]{style="letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[2nd. St Seraphim of Sarov, the Wonderworker.
[\[]{style="font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; color: red; letter-spacing: -.15pt; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold"}[See
17
January\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;letter-spacing:-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[5th. Eve of
Theophany.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;letter-spacing:-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[]{style="letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; letter-spacing: -.15pt"}

ROYAL HOURS
-----------

[FIRST HOUR]{style="color:red;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone 4. \[[Psalms 28:3 & 17:
1]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; letter-spacing: -.15pt"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}*

[The Lord thundered \* upon many
waters]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[.[]{style="letter-spacing:
-.15pt"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:
-.15pt"}*[I will love you, Lord, my
strength;]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[ the Lord is my support and my refuge and my
deliverer.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[]{style="letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[4.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[35,1-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: Rejoice, thirsty desert.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Let the desert be glad and flower like a
lily. The deserts of Jordan will blossom and be overgrown and be glad.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The glory of Lebanon has been given to it
and the honour of Carmel.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And my people
will see the glory of the Lord and the majesty of God.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Be strong, enfeebled hands and palsied
knees.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Give comfort and say to the
faint-hearted, Â‘Be strong and do not fear. See, our God is giving
judgement and will give it.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He himself
will come and save us.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then the eyes of
the blind will be opened and the ears of the deaf will hear.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then the lame will leap like a deer and the
tongue of stammerers will speak clearly, because water has burst out in
the desert and a channel in a thirsty land. And the waterless land will
become pools and there will be a spring of water for the thirsty land.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There will be joy of birds there, roosts of
owls[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9} and reed
beds and pools.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And there will be a pure
way there, and it will be called a holy way, and no one unclean may pass
along it.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There will be no unclean way
there.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But the scattered will walk upon it
and not go astray.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There will be no lion
there, nor will any of the evil wild beasts go up on it or be found
there.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But the redeemed and gathered by
the Lord will walk on it.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they will
return and come to Sion with joy and exultation, and everlasting joy
will be upon their head.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For on their head
will be praise and rejoicing, and gladness will possess them.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Pain, grief and sighing have fled
away.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[5.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Acts of the Apostles.\
\[[13:25-33^a^]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In those days, as John was finishing his course, he said, Â‘Whom do you
suppose that I am?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I am not he.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}No, but one is coming after me, the sandals
of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Brethren, children of the race of Abraham,
and those among you that fear God, to us has been sent the word of this
salvation.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}For those who live in Jerusalem and their rulers, because they did
not recognize him nor understand the sayings of the prophets which are
read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Though they found no cause deserving death, yet they asked Pilate
to have him done away with.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And when they
had fulfilled all that was written of him, they took him down from the
tree, and laid him in a grave.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But God
raised him from the dead;[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}and for many
days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to
Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And we bring you the good news that what was
promised to our ancestors, God has fulfilled for us their children by
raising Jesus.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[THIRD HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone 4. \[[Psalms 76:16 &
28:3]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10}*[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}*

[The waters saw you, O God, \* the waters saw you and were
afraid.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}*[ ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The
voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory thundered, the
Lord upon many
waters.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[6.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[1:16-20]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord:[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Wash yourselves; make
yourselves clean; remove your evil doings from your souls; before my
eyes cease from your evil doings.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Learn to
do good; seek judgement, deliver the oppressed; give judgement for the
orphan, do right for the widow.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And come
and let us reason together, says the Lord.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Though your sins are like scarlet, I will
make them white as snow; though they are red like crimson, I will make
them white like wool.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}If you are willing
and listen to me, you shall eat the good of the land; but if you are not
willing and do not listen to me, a sword will devour you; for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken this.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[7.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Acts of the Apostles.\
\[[19:1-8]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In those days, while Apollos was in Corinth, Paul passed through the
interior regions and came to Ephesus, where he found some disciples.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He said to them, Â‘Did you receive the Holy
Spirit when you believed?Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They replied,
Â‘No, we have not even heard that there is a Holy Spirit.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then he said, Â‘Into what then were you
baptized?Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They answered, Â‘Into JohnÂ’s
baptism.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Paul said, Â‘John baptized with
a baptism of repentance, telling the people to believe in the one who
was coming after him, that is, in Christ Jesus.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}On hearing this, they were baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}When Paul had laid
his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them, and they spoke in
tongues and prophesied.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There were about
twelve men all told.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He entered the
synagogue and for three months spoke out boldly, and argued persuasively
about the kingdom of
God.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[SIXTH HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone 4. \[[Psalms
28:3.1]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The voice of the Lord \* is upon the
waters.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse: ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[Bring to the Lord, you children of God,
bring to the Lord young rams, bring to the Lord glory and
honour.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[8.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[12,3-6]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: Draw water with gladness from the wells of
salvation.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And you will say in that day,
Â‘Sing praise to the Lord and cry out his name.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Proclaim among the Nations his glorious
deeds[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Remind them that his name has been
exalted . Sing praise to the name of the Lord, for he has done mighty
things.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Proclaim these in all the earth.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Rejoice and be glad, you that dwell in Sion,
because the Holy One of Israel has been exalted in the midst of
her.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[9.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Romans.\
\[[6:3-11]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Brethren, as many of us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into
his death. We were buried then with him through baptism to death, so
that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the
Father, we too might walk in newness of life. For if we have grown into
union with him through a death like his, we shall also be united with
him in the resurrection. For we know that our old self was crucified
with him, so that our sinful body might be done away with, that we might
no longer be in slavery to sin. For one who has died has been justified
from sin. If then we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also
live with him. For we know that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies
no more; death no longer lords it over him. As to dying, he died once
and for all; as to living, he lives for God. Consequently, you also must
consider yourselves dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our
Lord.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[NINTH HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone 3. \[[Psalm
26:1-2]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord is my enlightenment and my Saviour, \* whom shall I
fear?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;letter-spacing:-.1pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[ The Lord is
the defender of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.1pt"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[10]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[ The Reading is from the Prophecy of
Isaias]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}[\
\[[49:8-15]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: In an acceptable time I heard you, in a day of
salvation I helped you.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I fashioned you
and I gave you and set you as a covenant to the people, to establish the
land, to apportion inheritances for the desolate s; saying to the
prisoners, Â‘Come forthÂ’; to those who are in darkness, Â‘Reveal
yourselves.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They shall feed along the
ways, on all the paths shall be their pasture.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither
scorching wind nor sun shall smite them, but he who has mercy on them
will comfort them, and will lead them through springs of waters.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And I will make every mountain a way, and
every path a pasture for them.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}See, some
shall come from afar, some from the North and from the Sea, and others
from the land of the Persians.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Let the
heavens rejoice and the earth be glad; let the mountains break out into
joy and the hills into justice! For God has had mercy on his people, and
has comforted the lowly of his people.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But
Sion said, Â‘The Lord has forsaken me and the Lord has forgotten me.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Will a woman forget her child, or have no
mercy on the offspring of her womb?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Even
though a woman may forget, yet I will not forget you, says the Lord
Almighty.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[11.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to Titus.\
\[[2:11-14, 3:4-7]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Child Titus, the grace of God, which brings salvation has appeared to
all humankind, training us to renounce impiety and worldly desires, and
in the present age to live temperately, justly, and devoutly, while we
look for the blessed hope and the manifestation of the glory of our
great God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, who gave himself up for us that he
might redeem us from all iniquity and purify for himself a people of his
own, who are zealous for good works.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But
when the goodness and loving kindness of God our Saviour appeared, not
because of any works of justice that we had done, but according to his
mercy,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}he saved us, through the washing of
rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit, whom he has poured out on us
richly through Jesus Christ our Saviour,[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}so that, having been justified by his grace,
we might become heirs according to the hope of eternal
life.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:0pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; color: red"}

VESPERS
-------

[12]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}**[.]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[ The Reading is from
Genesis.\
]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[\[[1:1-13]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In the beginning God made the heaven and the earth.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Now the earth was invisible and unformed,
and darkness was upon the deep and the
Spirit[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11} of God was
borne upon the water.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God said, Â‘Let
there be lightÂ’, and there was light.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And God saw the light, that it was good; and God made a separation
between the light and the darkness.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And
God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night; and there
was evening and there was morning, one day.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God said, Â‘Let there be a firmament in
the midst of the water and let there be a separation between the water
and the waterÂ’; and it was so.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God
made the firmament.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God made a
separation between the water, which was below the firmament, and between
the water which was above the firmament.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God called the firmament Heaven; and God
saw that it was good, and there was evening and there was morning, a
second day.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God said, Â‘Let the water
below heaven be gathered together into one gathering, and let dry land
appearÂ’; and it was so.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the water
below heaven was gathered together into their gatherings, and the dry
land appeared.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God called the dry land
Earth, and the accumulations of the waters he called Seas.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God saw that it was good.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God said, Â‘Let the earth sprout herb of
grass, sowing seed according to its kind and according to its likeness,
and fruiting tree making fruit, whose seed is in it according to its
kind upon the earthÂ’; and it was so.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And
the earth brought forth herb of grass, sowing seed according to its kind
and according to its likeness, and fruiting tree making fruit, whose
seed was in it according to its kind upon the earth, and God saw that it
was good.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And there was evening and
morning, a third
day.]{style="font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua""}

[13]{style="font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; color: red; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold"}[.
The Reading is from Exodus\
\[[14:15-18, 21-23,
27-29]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[The Lord said to Moses,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Â‘Why do you cry to me?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Speak to the
children of Israel and let them strike camp.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And you, lift up your rod, and stretch out
your hand over the sea and divide it, let the children of Israel go into
midst of the sea on dry ground.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And I will
harden the hearts of Pharao, of his servants and of all the Egyptians so
that they shall go in after them, and I will be glorified in Pharao and
all his host, his chariots, and his horses.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And all the Egyptians shall know that I am
the Lord, when am glorified in Pharao, his chariots, and his horses.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then Moses stretched out his hand over the
sea; and the Lord drove the sea back by a strong south wind all night,
and made the sea dry land, and the water was divided.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the children of Israel went into the
midst of the sea on dry ground, and the water was a wall for them on
their right hand and on their left.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The
Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst of the sea, all
PharaoÂ’s cavalry, his chariots, and his riders.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
returned to its wonted flow when day came; and the Egyptians fled into
the water, and the Lord shook off the Egyptians into the midst of the
sea.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The waters returned and covered the
chariots and the riders and all the host of Pharaoh that had gone after
them into the sea; not so much as one of them remained.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But the children of Israel walked on dry
ground in the midst of the
sea.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:0pt"}

[14]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red"}[The Reading is from Exodus.\
\[[15:22-16:1]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Moses led the children of Israel up from the Red Sea and brought them
to the desert of Sour.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they marched
for three in the desert and found no water to drink.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They came to Merra and were unable to drink
the water from Merra, because it was bitter.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And so the place was named
Â‘BitternessÂ’.[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn12){#_ftnref12}[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the people started to murmur against
Moses and say, Â‘What are we to drink?Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Moses cried to the Lord and the Lord showed
him a piece of wood. He threw it into the water and it became sweet.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}There God laid down for
him[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn13){#_ftnref13} statutes
and judgements and he tested him there and said, Â‘If you listen to the
voice of the Lord, your God, and do what is well-pleasing before him,
heed his commandments and keep all his statutes, I will not bring on you
any of the diseases that I brought on the Egyptians.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For I am the Lord who heals you.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they came to Elim and there were twelve
springs of water there and seventy date palms.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they encamped there by the waters.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then they moved away from Elim and the whole
Assembly of the children of Israel came to desert of Sin, which is
between Elim and
Sina.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[15]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red"}[ The Reading is from Jesus, son of Navi.\
\[[3:7-8, 15-17]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord said to Jesus, Â‘This day I will begin to exalt you in the
sight of all the children of Israel, that they may know that, as I was
with Moses, so I will be with you.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And now
command the priests who bear the Ark of the Covenant, and say, Â“When
you come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, you shall stand still
in the Jordan.Â”Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And when the priests
who bore the [a]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}rk of the
[c]{style="text-transform:
uppercase"}ovenant of the Lord had come to the Jordan, and the feet of
the priests bearing the ark were dipped in the brink of the water (the
Jordan overflowed all its banks throughout the time of harvest), the
waters coming down from above stood and rose up in a heap far off, from
the city of Adami, as far as the area of Kariathiarim, and those flowing
down toward the sea of the Araba, as far as the Salt Sea, were wholly
cut off.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And the people stopped opposite Jericho.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The priests who bore the Ark of the Covenant
of the Lord stood ready on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And all the children of Israel crossed
through dry land, until the whole people had finished passing over the
Jordan.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[16]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red"}[ The Reading is from the Fourth Book of Reigns.\
\[[2:6-14]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Elias said to Elissaios, Â‘Stay here; for the Lord has sent me as far
as the JordanÂ’.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But Elissaios said, Â‘As
the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So the two of them went on.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Fifty men of the sons of the prophets came
and stood at some distance from them, as they both were standing by the
Jordan.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Then Elias took his mantle and rolled it up, and struck the water
with it; the water was parted to the one side and to the other, and the
two of them crossed on dry ground.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}When
they had crossed, Elias said to Elissaios, Â‘Ask me what I may do for
you, before I am taken up from you.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Elissaios said, Â‘Please let me inherit a
double share of your spirit.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He replied,
Â‘You have asked a hard thing; yet, if you see me as I am being taken up
from you, it will be granted you; if not, it will not.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}It came to pass that as they continued
walking and talking, a chariot of fire and horses of fire separated the
two of them, and Elias was taken up in a whirlwind as if into heaven.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Elissaios kept watching and crying out,
Â‘Father, father! The chariot of Israel and its horseman!Â’ But when he
could no longer see him, Elissaios grasped his own clothes and tore them
in two pieces.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He picked up the mantle of
Elias that had fallen from him, and went back and stood on the bank of
the Jordan. [ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Elissaios took the mantle of
Elias that had fallen from him, and struck the water, and they were not
parted[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn14){#_ftnref14}.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And he said, Â‘Where is the God of Elias,
Appho?Â’[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn15){#_ftnref15} And so
Elissaios struck the waters, and the waters were parted to the one side
and to the other, and Elissaios went over on dry
ground.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[17]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Fourth Book of Reigns\
\[[5:9-14]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Neeman, Governor of the King of the Assyrians, came with his chariots
and horses, and halted at the door of Elissaios Â‘s house.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And Elissaios sent a messenger to him,
saying, Â‘Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and your flesh shall be
restored, and you shall be cleansed.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But
Neeman was angry, and went away, saying, Â‘Behold, I said that he will
come out to me, and call on the name of the Lord his God, and lay his
hand on the leprosy, and remove it from my flesh.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Are not Abana and Pharphar, the rivers of
Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Could I not go and wash in them, and be
cleansed?Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So he turned and went away in
a rage.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But his servants came near and
said to him, Â‘Father, if the prophet had commanded you to do some great
thing, would you not have done it?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}But he has simply said to you, Â“Wash, and be cleansedÂ”?Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So he went down and plunged himself seven
times in the Jordan, according to the word of the man of God; and his
flesh was restored for him like the flesh of a little child, and he was
cleansed.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[Reading
6.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[18.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from Genesis.\
\[[32:1-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Jacob looked up and saw the army of God encamped around and the angels
of God met him; and when Jacob saw them he said, Â‘This is GodÂ’s
encampment!Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So he called the name of
that place Encampment.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And Jacob sent
messengers before him to Esau his brother in the land of Seir, the
country of Edom, instructing them, Â‘Thus you shall say to my lord
Esau:[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Thus says your servant Jacob, Â“I
have sojourned with Laban, and stayed until now; and I have sheep, oxen,
asses, menservants, and maidservants; and I have sent to tell my lord
Esau, in order that your servant may find favour in your sight.Â”Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, Â‘We came to your
brother Esau, and he is coming to meet you, and four hundred men with
him.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then Jacob was greatly afraid and
distressed; and he divided the people that were with him, and the oxen
and the sheep, into two encampments, thinking, "If Esau comes to the one
encampment and destroys it, then the other encampment which is left will
be saved.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And Jacob said, Â‘God of my
father Abraham and God of my father Isaac, O Lord who said to me,
Â“Return to the land of your birth and I will do you good,Â” let me be
worthy of all the justice and all the truth which you have done to your
servant, for I crossed the Jordan with only this staff of
mine.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[19]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from Exodus.\
\[[2:5-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[PharaoÂ’s daughter came down to wash at the river, and her maidens
walked beside the river; she saw the basket among the reeds and sent her
maid to fetch it.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}When she opened it she
saw the child in the basket; and it was crying. PharaoÂ’s daughter took
pity on him and said, Â‘This is one of the HebrewsÂ’ children.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then his sister said to PharaoÂ’s daughter,
Â‘Do you want me to call you a Hebrew women to nurse the child for
you?Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And PharaoÂ’s daughter said to her,
Â‘Go.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So the girl went and called the
childÂ’s mother.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And PharaoÂ’s daughter
said to her, Â‘Look after this child, and nurse him for me, and I will
give you your wages.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So the woman took
the child and nursed him.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the child
grew, and she brought him to PharaoÂ’s daughter, and he became a son for
her; and she named him Moses, for she said, Â‘ I took him out of the
water.Â’]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[20]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red"}[ The Reading is from Judges.\
\[[6:36-40]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Gideon said to God, Â‘If you are going to save Israel by my hand, as
you have said, see, I am laying a fleece of wool on the threshing floor;
if there is dew on the fleece alone, and it is dry on all the ground,
then I shall know that you are going to save Israel by my hand, as you
have said.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And it was so.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}When Gideon rose early next morning and squeezed the fleece, he
wrung enough dew from the fleece to fill a bowl with water.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then Gideon said to God, Â‘Do not let your
anger burn against me, let me speak once again; pray, let me make trial
once again with the fleece; let it be dry only on the fleece, and on all
the ground let there be dew.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And God did
so that night; for it was dry on the fleece only, and on all the ground
there was dew.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[21.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ The Reading is from the Third Book of Reigns.\
\[[18:30-39]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Elias said to the people, Â‘Come closeÂ’.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And all the people came closer to him.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Elias took twelve stones, according to the
number of the tribes of Israel, to whom the word of the Lord had come,
saying, Â‘Israel shall be your nameÂ’.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}With the stones he built and repaired the
altar of the Lord that had been cast down.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then he made a trench around the altar,
large enough to contain two measures of seed.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Next he put the pieces of wood on the altar
he had made, cut the holocaust in pieces, and laid them on the pieces of
wood and piled them on the altar.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He said,
Â‘Bring me two jars of water and pour it on the holocaust and on the
pieces of wood.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then he said, Â‘Do it a
second timeÂ’; and they did it a second time.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Again he said, Â‘Do it a third timeÂ’; and
they did it a third time, so that the water ran all around the altar,
and filled the trench also with water.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And
the prophet Elias cried aloud to heaven and said, Â‘Lord, God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, hear me today by fire.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And let this people known that you alone the
Lord. the God of Israel, that I am your servant, and that through you I
have done all these things, and that you have turned back the heart of
this people to you.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then fire from the
Lord fell from heaven and consumed the holocaust and the pieces of wood;
and the fire licked up the water that was in the trench, the stones, and
the dust.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the people fell on their
faces and said, Â‘The Lord indeed is God; he is
God.Â’]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:0pt"}

[22]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Fourth Book of Reigns.\
\[[2:19-22]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The men of the city of Jericho said to Elissaios, Â‘The situation of
this city is good, as you see, lord; but the water is bad, and the land
is unfruitful.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He said, Â‘Bring me a new
bowl, and put salt in it.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And he took
it. Then he went to the spring of water and threw the salt in it, and
said, Â‘Thus says the Lord, I have healed this water; henceforth no one
will die from it, no one be unfruitful because of it.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}So the water has been healed to this day,
according to the word which Elissaios
spoke.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:0pt"}

[Reading
10.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

**GREAT BLESSING OF WATERS**

[Reading
4.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[23]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[55,1-13]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: You that thirst, go for water. And as many of you
as have no money, make your way and buy. And eat and drink wine and fat
without money and price. Why do you spend money on what is not food, and
toil for what does not satisfy? Hear me, and eat what is good, and your
soul will delight in good things. Give heed with your ears and follow in
my ways. Listen to me and your soul will live among good things. And I
will make an eternal Covenant with you, the sure mercies of David. See,
I have given him as a testimony among the Nations, a ruler and commander
among the Nations. See, Nations who do not know you will call upon you,
and peoples who are not acquainted with you will take refuge with you,
for the sake of the Lord your God and the Holy One of Israel, because he
has glorified you. Seek the Lord, and when you find him, call upon him.
But when he comes near you, let the impious abandon his ways and a
lawless man his plans. And return to the Lord and you will find mercy,
and cry out, for he will abundantly forgive your sins. For my plans are
not like your plans, nor are my ways like your ways, says the Lord. But
as far as heaven is from earth, so far is my way from your ways and your
thoughts from my mind. For as rain or snow comes down from heaven and
does not return until it has saturated the earth and it brings forth and
sprouts and gives seed to the sower and bread for food, so will my word
be. Whatever comes out of my mouth will not return to me empty, until
everything that I wished has been fulfilled. And I will make my ways and
my commands prosper. You will go out with gladness and be taught with
joy. For the mountains and hills will leap up, welcoming you with joy,
and all the trees of the field will clap with their branches. And
instead of brambles cypress will come up, and instead of nettles myrtle
will come up. And there shall be for the Lord a name and an everlasting
sign, and it will not fail.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[Reading
8.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Prokeimenon. Tone 3. \[[Psalm
26:1-2]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord is my enlightenment and my Saviour, \* whom shall I
fear?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;letter-spacing:-.1pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[ The Lord is
the defender of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.1pt"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[24]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the 1st Epistle of Paul to the
Corinthians.\
\[[10,1-4]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Brethren, I do not want you to be ignorant of how our Fathers were all
under the cloud and all passed through the
sea.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they were all baptised into Moses
in the cloud and in the sea.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they all
ate the same spiritual food.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they all
drank the same spiritual drink.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For they
drank from the spiritual rock that followed
them.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Now the rock was
Christ.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:0pt"}

 

**[11th. St Theodosios the Koinoviarch. Readings 25, 26 and 27,
below.]{style="letter-spacing: 0pt"}**[
]{style="font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:0pt"}

[17th. St Antony the Great. \[And for other
Ascetics\][]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[25]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[[3:1-9]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The souls of the just are in the hand of God, and no torment will ever
touch them.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}In the eyes of fools they
seemed to have died, their departure was reckoned a disaster and their
going from us a destruction; but they are in
peace.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}For though in the sight of mortals
they were punished, their hope is full of immortality. And having been
disciplined a little, they will receive great good; because God tried
them and found them worthy of himself.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He
proved them like gold in a furnace and accepted them as a sacrificial
whole burnt offering.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}At the moment of their visitation they will shine out, and they
will run like sparks through stubble.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}They
will judge nations and hold sway over peoples, and the Lord will be
their king to the ages.[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Those who have put
their trust in him will understand truth; and the faithful in love will
abide with him; because grace and mercy are upon his holy ones, and his
visitation upon his chosen
ones.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:0pt"}

[26]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon\
\[[5:15-23 & 6:1,3]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The just live forever and their reward is in the Lord, and their care
with the Most High. Because of this they will receive the royal crown of
majesty and the diadem of beauty from the LordÂ’s hand; because he will
shelter them with his right hand, and shield them with his arm.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He will take his zeal as his panoply and he
will arm creation to repel his foes.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He
will put on justice as a breastplate, and wear impartial judgement as a
helmet.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He will take holiness as an
invincible shield. He will sharpen stern wrath as a sword. The world
will fight with him against the frenzied.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Well-aimed bolts of lightning will go forth
and will leap from the clouds to the target as from a well-strung bow.
Hailstones full of wrath will be hurled from a catapult. The water of
the sea will rage against them, while rivers will relentlessly overwhelm
them. A spirit of power will stand against them, and will winnow them
like a tempest.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Lawlessness will make the
whole earth a desert, and evil-doing will overturn the thrones of
kings.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Listen then, you kings, and
understand. Learn, you judges of the ends of the earth. Give ear, you
that hold sway over a multitude and boast over crowds of nations.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Because your might was given you from the
Lord, and your power from the Most High.]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[27]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[[4:7-15]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[A just man[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn16){#_ftnref16}, even if he die early, will be at rest.
For an honoured old age is not so for length of time, nor is it measured
by the number of years.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Understanding is peoplesÂ’ true grey hairs, and a ripe old age a
spotless life.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Having become pleasing to
God, he was loved; and while living among sinners, he was taken
away.[[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn17){#_ftnref17}[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}He was snatched away lest wickedness pervert
his understanding, or trickery deceive his soul.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}For the witchery of what is paltry dims what is good, and the
inconstancy of desire undermines an innocent mind.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled long years, for his soul
was pleasing to the Lord, therefore he hurried him from the midst of
evil.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}But the peoples saw and did not
understood, nor did they lay such a thing to heart, that grace and mercy
are with his holy ones, and his presence with his chosen
ones[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn18){#_ftnref18}.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[18th. Saints Athanasios and Cyril, Patriarchs of
Alexandria.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[28]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[1,8-11 & 15-17^b^]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel, Â‘See, I have delivered; the land
before you. Go in and inherit the land which the
Lord[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn19){#_ftnref19} swore to
your fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that he would give it to them and
to their seed after them. And I spoke to you at that time and said, Â‘I
shall not be able to bear you alone. The Lord your God has multiplied
you, and see, you are today like the stars of heaven in multitude. May
the Lord, the God of our fathers, multiply you so that you are a
thousand times more numerous, and bless you as he said to youÂ‘. And I
took from you wise, understanding and prudent men, and set them to rule
over you as captains of thousands and hundreds and fifties and tens and
as recorders for your judges. And I commanded your judges at that time,
saying, Â‘Hear cases between your brethren, and judge rightly between a
man and his brother and the stranger[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn20){#_ftnref20} who is
with him. You shall not have respect to persons in judging. You shall
hear the small as well as the great. You shall not shrink before
anyoneÂ’s person; for the judgement is
GodÂ’sÂ‘Â‘]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}.

[29]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[10,14-18 & 20-21]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel, Â‘See, the heaven and the highest
heaven[[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn21){#_ftnref21} belong to
the Lord your God, the earth and all that is in
them[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn22){#_ftnref22}. The Lord
preferred your fathers, to love them, and he chose you, their seed after
them,[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn23){#_ftnref23} above all nations, as it is at this
day. So circumcise the hardness of your heart and stiffen your neck no
longer. For the Lord your God is God of Gods and Lord of Lords, the
great God, mighty and awesome, who shows no partiality, who takes no
bribe. He executes judgement for the
stranger[[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn24){#_ftnref24}, the
orphan and the widow; and loves the stranger, giving him food and
clothing. You shall fear Lord your God and serve him alone, and to him
you shall hold fast, and take oaths in his name. He is your boast, he
your God, who has done for you the great and wonderful things which your
eyes have seen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**Reading 4. \[See 2 January\]**

[20th. Our Venerable Father Efthymios. \[[See17
January\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

**25th. Our Father among the Saints Gregory the Theologian,\
Archbishop of Constantinople.**

[30]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[. The Reading is from
Proverbs.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[\
Selection.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 14.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn25){#_ftnref25}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The memory of a just man[[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn26){#_ftnref26} is
praised, and the LordÂ’s blessing is upon his head. Blessed is one who
has found wisdom; a mortal who knows understanding. To import her is
better than treasures of gold and silver. She is more valuable than
precious stones; nothing of value equals her worth. Justice proceeds
from her mouth; she bears law and mercy on her tongue. Therefore, my
children, listen to me, for I speak weighty things. And blessed is the
one who keeps my ways. For my goings out are the goings out of life, and
favour is prepared from the Lord. Therefore I exhort you, and utter my
voice to the children of humankind. Because I, Wisdom, have prepared
counsel, knowledge and understanding. I have called on
them[[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn27){#_ftnref27}. Counsel
and sureness are mine; prudence is mine, strength is mine. I love those
who are my friends, while those who seek me will find grace. You
innocent, then, understand cunning; you untaught, take it to heart.
Listen to me, for I will speak weighty things, and I will open right
things from my lips. Because my throat will meditate truth; lying lips
are abominable before me. All the words of my mouth are with justice,
there is nothing crooked in them nor twisted. They are all straight for
those who understand, and right for those who find knowledge. For I
teach you what is true, that your hope may be in the Lord and that you
may be filled with
spirit.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Reading 6. \[2
January\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading 3. \[1
January\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}**

**27th. Translation of the Relics of our Father among the Saints John
Chrysostom, Archbishop of Constantinople.**

[**Reading 30. \[25 January\]**]{style="letter-spacing:-.3pt"}

[31.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.3pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[ The Reading is from the Wisdom of
Solomon.\
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.3pt"}[Selection.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[When a just man is praised, peoples will be glad; for immortality is
his memory, because it is known both to God and humankind, and his soul
is pleasing to the Lord. Therefore, O men[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn28){#_ftnref28}, desire
wisdom, and long for it and be instructed. For her beginning is love and
keeping of laws. Honour Wisdom, that you may reign for ever. I will
declare the mysteries of God to you and not hide them from you. Because
he is both the guide of Wisdom and the One who sets right the wise. In
his hand are all prudence, and knowledge of works. Wisdom, the artificer
of all things, taught me, for in her is an understanding spirit, holy,
brightness of the eternal light and image of the goodness of God. She
makes friends of God and prophets. She is more lovely than the sun, and
beyond every order of the stars. If compared to light, she is found
before it. She delivered her devotees from toils, and guided them in
straight paths. She gave them holy knowledge and protected them from
those who lay in ambush for them. She awarded them a mighty contest,
that all might know that true religion is more powerful than all, and
that wickedness can never prevail against Wisdom, nor will justice in
passing sentence overlook evil people. For they said in themselves, not
reasoning correctly, Â‘Let us overpower the just one, let us not spare
his saintliness, nor feel reverence for the aged grey hairs of an elder.
Let our strength be law. Let us lie in ambush for the just, for he is a
hindrance to us and he is opposed to our works and alleges the sins of
our upbringing. He claims to have knowledge of God, and calls himself a
child of the Lord. He has become a reproof to our thoughts. He is
grievous for us even to look at, for his life is not like others and his
paths are quite different. We are reckoned by him to be counterfeit, and
he keeps away from our ways as from filth. He calls the end of just
people blessed. Let us see if his words are true, and let us test what
will happen to him at the end. Let us examine him by insult and torture,
that we may know his forbearance and make trial of his patience. Let us
condemn him to a shameful death, for he will have protection from his
own words.Â’ This was how they argued, and they were deceived, for their
wickedness had blinded them. And they did not know the mysteries of God,
nor did they judge that you alone are God, who have authority over life
and death, who save in time of tribulation and deliver from every ill;
pitying and merciful, giving grace to your holy ones, and by your right
arm resisting the
proud.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**Reading 3. \[1 January\]**

[30th. Assembly of the Ecumenical Teachers and Great Hierarchs, Basil
the Great, Gregory the Theologian and John Chrysostom. \[[See 18
January\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}^[\ ]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}^[The
text of the Menaion is more complex than some lists reveal.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}In particular, verse 3 is displaced to
follow v.7 and the clause Â‘and he worshipped the LordÂ’ is added.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}This difference is not noted by Wevers in
his apparatus to the GÃ¶ttingen
edition.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
Literally Â‘before the ageÂ’, but this sounds very odd in English.
However, it underlines the fact that the Greek *aion* is a Â‘timeÂ’
word, rather than a Â‘placeÂ’
one.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
The first part of this sentence is only found in the Alexandrinus and
the reviser of the Sinaiticus. It is from the Hebrew and marked by
Origen with the \*. The precise meaning of the Hebrew is unclear, and so
is the Greek. The translation given above is plausible, but not
necessarily
correct.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
This elaborate reading is taken from Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and lastly
Wisdom, hence the title. The opening part of the text speaks both of Â‘a
manÂ’ Â— *aner* not *anthropos* Â— and Â‘\[the\] wiseÂ’, or Â‘\[the\]
justÂ’, in the
plural.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
Cf. Psalm
118,1.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
Since Wisdom is personified in these texts, the feminine has been
retained in the translation, without prejudice, as the lawyers
say.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7}[
The four natural, or Â‘cardinalÂ’
virtues.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8}[
Unusually this Prokeimenon is taken from two different Psalms. The
prokeimenon is taken from the last half of Psalm 28:3, with a
repunctuation of the Greek.
]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9}[
This phrase presents considerable problems.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}It does not occur in the critical texts,
which simply have Â‘habitations of reedÂ’. It does, however, occur in
34:13.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}It is unclear why the pious
baronet, Sir Lancelot C. L. Brenton, renders it Â‘ready habitationsÂ’.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Does he mean Â‘reedy habitationsÂ’?[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}The word I have rendered Â‘owlsÂ’ is in
Greek Â‘sirensÂ’.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}In 34 the context is
negative, Â‘Thorns shall grow up in their cities. Â… They shall be
habitations of *sirens* Â— which the pious baronet translates, both here
and elsewhere, by Â‘monstersÂ’ Â—, and a court of ostriches.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And demons will meet with *onokentauroi*
\[which means in classical Greek Â‘tailless apesÂ’!\].Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Here, though, the meaning should be
positive.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}The coupling of Â‘sirensÂ’ and Â‘ostrichesÂ’ also occurs at Job
30:29, again in a negative context. Â‘I have gone groaning without being
muzzled.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I stood crying out in the
assembly.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}I have become brother of sirens
and companion of ostrichesÂ’.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}On this
passage St John Chrysostom says, Â‘By sirens he means some form of bird
that sings, like kingfishers or owls, both of which have mournful
songsÂ’. Hence I tentatively put Â‘owlsÂ’ here, though perhaps the
translator was thinking of the mythical Sirens, whose song was so
alluring that it led mariners to their doom. A possible translation
might be Â‘songbirdsÂ’.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10}[
See the note on the Prokeimenon of the First
Hour.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11}[
A considerable problem for the translator, which I discussed at some
length in a review in *Sourozh*. The Fathers themselves are not agreed,
St Basil opting for Â‘SpiritÂ’, St Ephrem for Â‘windÂ’.
]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref12){#_ftn12}[
Neither Greek nor English can reproduce the play on the meaning of
*mara*.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref13){#_ftn13}[
Both the Hebrew and the Greek have singular pronouns in these verses,
though the reference must be to Israel, rather than Moses only. English
versions, including AV, NRSV and NAB, make this explicit by putting
Â‘themÂ’
here.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref14){#_ftn14}[
This clause is not in the Hebrew, nor in the uncials A and B. Rahlfs
reads not *dierthi*, but *diesti*. There are a number of other small
differences, but they do affect the
translation.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref15){#_ftn15}[
The LXX has here either *aphpho* or *appho*, both of which are odd,
being simply near transliterations of the Hebrew, which means something
like Â‘Yea, heÂ’, Â‘Even heÂ’. St Jerome has Â‘nunc etiamÂ’, which makes
sense, but is somewhat
free.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref16){#_ftn16}[
Although the Greek here, as in a number of other places, has
*anthropos*, I retain the translation Â‘manÂ’, since the passage is used
liturgically for a male. This does not create problems, since, so far as
I am aware, no female saints have readings at Vespers. Where the word is
plural Â‘inclusiveÂ’ words are
preferred.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref17){#_ftn17}[
A reference to Enoch \[Gen. 5,21-24\], who was a mere stripling of three
hundred and sixty five by patriarchal standards when God took him.
]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref18){#_ftn18}[
This sentence contains no main verb in Greek, the first three verbs
being aorist
participles.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref19){#_ftn19}[
Both the <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span> and the <span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">mt</span> have the first person in this
verse. The lectionary, like a few minuscules, has the
third.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn20" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref20){#_ftn20}[
The Greek is Â‘proselyteÂ’, but the word in the <span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span> simply means someone who
Â‘comes to oneÂ’ from elsewhere. The French translate by Â‘immigrantÂ’,
which is accurate, but gives the wrong connotation in
English.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn21" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref21){#_ftn21}[
Literally Â‘the heaven of heavenÂ’, but this, with the singular, sounds
odd in
English.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn22" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref22){#_ftn22}[
The <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span> has the singular
here, referring to the
earth.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn23" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref23){#_ftn23}[
*La Bible d*Â‘*Alexandrie* takes *metÂ’autous ymas* together, Â‘after
youÂ’, but this is surely
wrong.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn24" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref24){#_ftn24}[
See the note on this word in Reading
28.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn25" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref25){#_ftn25}[
I give no list of verses, since this is a most complicated selection of
verses and half verses, and the numbering of the Greek and Hebrew
differs.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn26" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref26){#_ftn26}[
See the note on Reading
6.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn27" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref27){#_ftn27}[
This is the punctuation of the lectionary. The natural way is to take
Â‘knowledge and understandingÂ’ as objects of Â‘call
onÂ’.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn28" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref28){#_ftn28}[
The Greek here has *andres*, not
*anthropoi.*]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
