\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](prophetologion.md) \]
\[ [Readings September to November](readings_september_to_november.md) \]
\[ [Readings December](readings_december.md) \]
\[ [Readings for January](readings_for_january.md) \]
\[ [Readings February to April](Readings%20February%20to%20April.md) \]
\[ Readings May to August \]

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; color: red"}

READINGS FOR VESPERS
====================

**[]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}**

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

MAY
---

[]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[8th. Holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Theologian, the Beloved
Disciple and Bosom Friend of
Christ.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ \[[And 26
September]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}

[45.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
reading from the 1st Epistle General of John\
\[[3,21-24; 4,1-6]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us we have boldness towards God.
And whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his
commandments and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And
this is his commandment: that we should believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And he who
keeps his commandments abides in him and he in him. And by this we know
that he abides in us, from the Spirit of which he has given us. Beloved,
do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits, whether they are of
God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world. By this
you know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ has come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that does not
confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God. And this
is the spirit of the Antichrist, which you have heard is coming, and is
now already in the world. You are of God, little children, and have
overcome them, because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the
world. They are of the world. Therefore they speak as of the world, and
the world hears them. We are of God. He who knows God hears us; he who
is not of God does not hear
us.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[46.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
reading from the 1st Epistle General of John.\
\[[4,11-16]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. No one
has ever seen God. If we love another, God abides in us, and his love
has been perfected in us. By this we know that we abide in him, and he
in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and
witness that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world.
Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and
he in God. And we have known and have believed the love which God has
for us. God is love, and he who abides in love abides in God, and God in
him.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[47.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
reading from the 1st Epistle General of John.\
\[[4,20-21; 5,1-5]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, if someone says, Â‘I love God,Â’ and hates his brother, he is
a liar; for he who does not love his brother whom he has seen, how can
he love God whom he has not seen? And this commandment we have from him:
that he who loves God must love his brother also. Everyone who believes
that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who loves
him who has begotten loves also him who has been begotten of him. By
this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep
his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments. And his commandments are not heavy. Because whatever has
been born of God conquers the world. And this is the victory that has
conquered the world, our faith. Who is the one who conquers the world,
if not the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of
God?]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**9th. Translation of the Relics of St Nicolas the Wonderworker from
Myra to Bari.**

[Reading
30.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[48.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;letter-spacing:
-.15pt"}[ The Reading is from
Proverbs.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
letter-spacing:-.15pt"}[\
\[[10:31-32 &
11:1-12]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[The mouth of the just drops wisdom; but the tongue of the unjust will
be cut out. The lips of just men know graces; but the mouth of the
impious is turned away. A false balance is an abominÂ­ation before the
Lord; but a just weight is acceptable to him. Wherever pride enters,
there too dishonour; but the mouth of the humble meditates wisÂ­dom. The
perfection of the devout will guide them, but the crookedness of the
treacherous will carry them off. PropÂ­erty does not profit in the day
of wrath, but justice will deliver from death. When a just man dies he
leaves regret; ready and welcome the destruction of the ungodly. The
justice of the blameÂ­less keeps their ways straight, but impiÂ­ety
encounters injustice. The justice of upright men will deliver them, but
transgressors are caught by base counÂ­sel. When a just man dies his
hope does not perish; but the boast of the ungodly perishes. A just man
escapes from the hunt, but the ungodly is given up in his place. In the
mouth of the ungodly is a snare for citizens, but the perception of the
just brings prosperity. By the good things of the just a city is
successful, and in the loss of the unÂ­godly their is gladness. By the
blessing of the upright a city is exalted, but by the mouth of the
ungodly it will be[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}overthrown. One who
lacks sense sneer at their fellow citizens, an intelligent man practices
stillness.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt"}

[Reading
27.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[10th. The Holy Apostle Simon Zelotes.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[\[[As on May
8th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\][]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[11th. Holy Equals of the Apostles Cyril and Methodios, Evangelisers of
the Slavs.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[\[[As on May
9th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[21st. Holy Equal of the Apostles Emperor Constantine the Great and his
mother
Helena.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[49.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Third Book of Reigns.\
\[[8:22.23, 27-30]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Solomon stood before the altar of the Lord in the presence of all the
assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands towards heaven; and said,
Â‘ Lord, God of Israel, there is no God like you, in heaven above or on
earth beneath, If, heaven and the highest heaven cannot contain you; how
much less this house which I have built! Yet have regard to my
supplication, O Lord God of Israel, hearkening to the prayer which your
servant prays before you today; that your eyes may be open towards this
house day and night, towards the place of which you have said, Â“My name
shall be there,Â” to hearken to the prayer which your servant prays
towards this place day and night. And hearken to the supplication of
your servant and of your people Israel, when they pray toward this
place; and hear your dwelling place in heaven; and you will act and show
pity.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[50.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[61:10-62:5]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Let my soul rejoice in my God; for he has clothed me with a garment of
salvation and a tunic of gladness, as a bridegroom he has put a garland
upon me, and as a bride he has adorned me with beauty. For as the earth
brings forth its flower, and as a garden it seeds, so the Lord God will
cause justice and joy to spring forth before all the nations. For
SionÂ’s sake I will not keep silent, and for JerusalemÂ’s sake I will
not rest, until my justice goes forth like light, and my salvation as a
burning torch. The nations shall see your justice, and kings your glory;
and he will be call you by a new name which the Lord will give.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}You shall be a crown of beauty in the hand
of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of your God. You shall no
more be termed Â‘ForsakenÂ’, and your land shall no more be termed
Â‘DesertÂ’; but you shall be called Â‘My WillÂ’, and your land
Â‘InhabitedÂ’; for the Lord has been well pleased in you, and your land
shall be inhabited. For as a young man marries a virgin, so shall your
sons make their dwelling, and as bridegroom rejoices over bride, so
shall the Lord rejoice over
you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[51.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[60:1-16]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Shine, shine, Jerusalem; for your light has come, and the glory of the
Lord has risen upon you. For behold, darkness shall cover the earth,
like thick darkness over nations; but the Lord will appear upon you, and
his glory will be seen upon you. And kings will walk by your light, and
nations by your brightness.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Lift up your
eyes round about, and see your children have been gathered; your sons
have come from far, and your daughters shall be carried on the
shoulders.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then you shall see and be
afraid, and be amazed in heart; because the wealth of the sea shall be
turned to you, and that of nations and peoples. Flocks of camels shall
come to you, the camels of Madiam and Gaipha will cover you; all those
from Sheba shall come, bringing gold and they will bring incense and
precious stone, and shall proclaim the good tidings of the LordÂ’s
salvation. All the sheep of Kedar shall be gathered to you, the rams of
Nebaioth shall come to you; acceptable sacrifices will be offered on my
altar, and my house of prayer will be glorified.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Who are these that fly like clouds, and like
doves with their nestlings?[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}For the islands have waited for me, the ships of Tharsis first of
all, to bring your children from far, their silver and gold with them,
for the holy name of the Lord, and for the Holy One of Israel to be
glorious.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Foreigners shall build up your
walls, and their kings shall stand before you; for in my wrath I smote
you, but in mercy I have loved you. Your gates shall be open
continually; day and night they shall not be shut; that men may bring to
you the power of nations, with their kings led in procession. For the
nation and kings that will not serve you shall perish; the nations shall
be utterly laid waste. The glory of Lebanon shall come to you, with
cypress, pine, and cedar, to glorify my holy place; and I will make the
place of my feet glorious. The sons of those who oppressed you and
troubled you shall come to you in fear; you shall be called Â‘City of
the Lord, Sion of the Holy One of IsraelÂ’. Whereas you have been
forsaken and hated, with no one to help, I will make you a joy for ever,
a gladness from generation to generation. You shall suck the milk of
nations, eat the wealth of kings; and you shall know that I, the Lord,
am your Saviour and the God of Israel your Redeemer.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[25th. Third Finding of the Precious Head of St John the
Baptist.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[ \[[As on February
24th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; text-transform: uppercase"}

june
----

[]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;text-transform:
uppercase"}

**9th. Saint Cyril Archbishop of
Alexandria.**[]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}

[R]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;text-transform:
uppercase;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[eading[
37.]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Reading
25.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
26.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;text-transform:uppercase"}

[11th[. ]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}Holy Apostles Bartholomew and
Barnabas.[
]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[\[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
text-transform:uppercase;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[As on June
29th]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;text-transform:uppercase;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[19th. Holy Apostle Jude, brother of the
Lord.[]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[52.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;text-transform:
uppercase"}[ T]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
text-transform:uppercase"}[he Reading is from the Universal Epistle of
Jude]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}[\
\[[1-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ and brother of James, To those who are
called, beloved in God the Father and kept for Jesus Christ: May mercy,
peace, and love be multiplied to you.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Beloved, being very eager to write to you
about our common salvation, I found it necessary to write appealing to
you to contend for the faith which was once for all delivered to the
saints. For certain people, who were long ago designated for this
condemnation, have intruded, ungodly persons who pervert the grace of
our God into licentiousness and deny our only Master and Lord, Jesus
Christ. Now I wish to remind you, though you were once for all fully
informed, that the Lord who saved a people out of the land of Egypt,
later destroyed those who did not believe.[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And the angels that did not keep their own
position but left their proper dwelling have been kept by him in eternal
chains in gloom until the judgement of the great day; just as Sodom and
Gomorra and the surrounding cities, which likewise practised sexual
immorality and indulged in unnatural lust, serve as an example by
undergoing a punishment of eternal fire. Yet in the same way these
dreamers defile the flesh, reject lordship, and revile the glorious
ones. But the archangel Michael, when he contended with the devil, in a
dispute about the body of Moses, did not presume to pronounce a reviling
judgement upon him, but said, Â‘The Lord rebuke you.Â’ But these people
revile whatever they do not understand, and by those things that they
know by nature like the irrational animals, they are
destroyed.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[53.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Universal Epistle of Jude.\
\[[11-16]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}woe to them! For they have
walked in the way of Cain, abandoned themselves to Balaam’s error for
the sake of gain, and perished in KoraÂ’s rebellion. These people are
blemishes on your love feasts, as they fearlessly carouse together,
looking after themselves; waterless clouds, carried along by winds;
fruitless trees in late autumn, twice dead, uprooted; wild waves of the
sea, foaming up their deeds of shame; wandering stars for whom the gloom
of darkness has been reserved for ever. It was of these also that Enoch
in the seventh generation from Adam prophesied, saying, Â‘Behold, the
Lord came with his holy myriads, to execute judgement on all, and to
convict all the ungodly of all their deeds of ungodliness which they
have committed in such an ungodly way, and of all the harsh things which
ungodly sinners have spoken against him.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}These people are grumblers, malcontents,
following their own passions, loud-mouthed boasters, flattering people
to gain advantage.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[54.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Universal Epistle of Jude.\
\[[17-25]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, remember, the words spoken beforehand by the apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ; they said to you, Â‘In the last time there will be
scoffers, following their own ungodly passions.Â’[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}It is these who set up divisions, living
according to nature, devoid of the Spirit. But you, beloved, build
yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit; keep
yourselves in the love of God, waiting for the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto eternal life. Have mercy on those who doubt; save others by
snatching them out of the fire; on others have mercy with fear, hating
even the tunic spotted by the flesh. Now to him who is able to keep you
from falling and to present you without blemish before the presence of
his glory with rejoicing,[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}to the only God,
our Saviour through Jesus Christ our Lord, be glory, majesty, might, and
authority, before all time and now and for all the ages.
Amen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**24th. Nativity of the Holy Glorious Prophet Forerunner and Baptist
John.**

[55.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Genesis.\
\[[17:15-17.19, 18:11-14, 21:1-2.4-8]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord God said to Abraham: As for Sara your wife, her name shall not
be called Sara, but Sarra shall be her name. I will bless her and will
give you a child from her; and I will bless it and it shall be for
nations and kings of nations will come from it. And Abraham fell on his
face, and laughed and said in his mind; Shall a son be born in my
hundredth year? And shall Sarra who is ninety bear a child? God said to
Abraham: Yes; see, your wife Sarra will bear you a son and you will call
his name Isaac; and I will establish my covenant with him as an
everlasting covenant. Now Abraham and Sarra were old, advanced in years.
But Sarra laughed to herself, saying: The thing has not happened to me
until now; and my lord is old. And the Lord God said to Abraham: Why did
Sarra laugh to herself, saying: Shall I really give birth? For I am
aged. But nothing is impossible for God. And the Lord visited Sarra, as
He had said, and she conceived and bore a son to Abraham in their old
age at the time the Lord had said to him. But he circumcised him on the
eighth day, as the Lord God had commanded him. And Abraham was a hundred
when Isaac his son was born to him. But Sarra said: The Lord has given
me laughter; for whoever hears will rejoice with me. And she said: Who
will announce to Abraham that Sarra is suckling a child, for I have born
a child in my old age? And the child grew and was weaned. And Abraham
held a great banquet on the day his son Isaac was
weaned.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[56.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Judges.\
\[[13:2-8.13-14.17-18.21]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In those days there was a man of the tribe of Dan and his name was
Manoe, and his wife was barren and had not borne a child. And the Angel
of the Lord appeared to his wife and said to her: See, you are barren
and have not borne a child or conceived a son. But now take care, and do
not drink wine or strong drink, and eat nothing unclean. Because see,
you will conceive in the womb and bear a son, and no iron shall touch
his head, because the child is to be a Nazarite to God from his
motherÂ’s womb. And the woman came and spoke to her husband, saying: A
Man of God came to me, and his appearance was as the appearance on an
Angel of God, exceedingly bright. And he said: See, you will conceive in
the womb and bear a son; and now take care, and drink no wine or strong
drink, and eat nothing unclean, for the child shall be a Nazarite of God
from the womb to the day of his death. And Manoe besought the Lord and
said: My Lord, let the man of God, whom You sent, come again to us, and
enlighten us what we should do for the child that is to be born. Then
the Angel came to Manoe and said: Of all the things that I said to your
wife, let her take care. She is not to eat anything that comes from the
vine; she is not to drink wine or strong drink. And Manoe said to the
Angel of the Lord: What is your name? That when your word comes to pass,
we may glorify you. And the Angel of the Lord said to him: Why do you
ask my name? For it is wonderful. And the Angel of the Lord appeared no
more to Manoe and his
wife.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[57.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of
Isaias.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}[\
\[[40:1-5.9, 41:17-18, 45:8, 48:20-21,
54:1]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
font-style:normal"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Thus says the Lord: Comfort, comfort my people, says God. Priests speak
to the heart of Jerusalem; comfort her, for her humiliation has been
completed; her sin has been abolished; for she has received from the
LordÂ’s hand double her sins. The voice of one crying in the wilderness:
Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Every valley will
be filled, and every mountain and hill humbled; and the crooked paths
will be straight and the rough, smooth ways; and all flesh will see the
salvation of God. Get up onto a high mountain you who bring good tidings
to Sion; lift up your voice with strength, you who bring good tidings to
Jerusalem: lift up, be not afraid! I the Lord God, I the God of Israel
will hear, and I will not forsake them. But I will open rivers on the
mountains, and springs in the midst of plains; I will make the
wilderness into pools and the thirsty land watercourses. Let the heavens
rejoice from above, and let the clouds rain down justice; let the earth
bring forth and blossom with mercy, and let it also bring forth justice.
Proclaim a voice of gladness to the ends of the earth, and let this be
heard. Say that the Lord has redeemed his servant Jacob. And if they
thirst through the wilderness, He will bring them water out of a rock.
Be glad, O barren one who have never borne, break forth and shout: many
are the children of the deserted, more than of her who has a
husband.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**29th. The Holy Glorious and All-praised Princes of the Apostles, Peter
and Paul.**

[58.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the First Universal Epistle of Peter.\
\[[1:3-9]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Brethren, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By
his great mercy he has given us a new birth into a living hope through
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and into an inheritance
that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you,
who are being protected by the power of God through faith for a
salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. In this you rejoice,
even if now for a little while you have had to suffer various trials, so
that the genuineness of your faith–being more precious than gold that,
though perishable, is tested by fire–may be found to result in praise
and glory and honour when Jesus Christ is revealed. Although you have
not seen him, you love him; and even though you do not see him now, you
believe in him and rejoice with an indescribable and glorious joy, for
you are receiving the outcome of your faith, the salvation of your
souls.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[59.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the First Universal Epistle of Peter.\
\[[1:13-15]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, therefore prepare your minds for action; discipline
yourselves; set all your hope on the grace that Jesus Christ will bring
you when he is revealed. Like obedient children, do not be conformed to
the desires that you formerly had in ignorance. Instead, as he who
called you is holy, be holy yourselves in all your conduct; for it is
written, Â‘You shall be holy, for I am holy.Â’ If you invoke as Father
the one who judges all people impartially according to their deeds, live
in reverent fear during the time of your exile. You know that you were
ransomed from the futile ways inherited from your ancestors, not with
perishable things like silver or gold, but with the precious blood of
Christ, like that of a lamb without defect or
blemish.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[60.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the First Universal Epistle of Peter.\
\[[2:11-24]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Beloved, I urge you as aliens and exiles to abstain from the desires of
the flesh that wage war against the soul. Conduct yourselves honourably
among the Gentiles, so that, though they malign you as evildoers, they
may see your honourable deeds and glorify God when he comes to judge.
For the LordÂ’s sake accept the authority of every human institution,
whether of the emperor as supreme, or of governors, as sent by him to
punish those who do wrong and to praise those who do right. For it is
GodÂ’s will that by doing right you should silence the ignorance of the
foolish. As servants of God, live as free people, yet do not use your
freedom as a pretext for evil. Honour everyone. Love the family of
believers. Fear God. Honour the emperor. Slaves, accept the authority of
your masters with all deference, not only those who are kind and gentle
but also those who are harsh. For it is a credit to you if, being aware
of God, you endure pain while suffering unjustly. If you endure when you
are beaten for doing wrong, what credit is that? But if you endure when
you do right and suffer for it, you have GodÂ’s approval. For to this
you have been called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you
an example, so that you should follow in his steps. Â‘He committed no
sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth.Â’ When he was abused, he did
not return abuse; when he suffered, he did not threaten; but he
entrusted himself to the one who judges justly. He himself bore our sins
in his body on the cross, so that, free from sins, we might live for
righteousness.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[JULY]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[5th. Saint Athanasios, Founder of the Great Lavra on Mt
Athos.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[\[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[As
on January
17th]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[5th. Uncovering of the relics of St Sergius of Radonezh.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[\[[As on May
11th]{style="color:red"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}*[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**13th-20th. Sunday of the Fathers.**

[61.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Genesis.\
\[[14,14-20]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Now when Abram heard that Lot his nephew had been taken captive, he
numbered his own home-born servants three hundred and eighteen, and
pursued the enemy as far as Dan. And he fell upon them by night, he and
his servants, and smote them and pursued them as far as Chobal, which is
on the left of Damascus. And he brought back all the cavalry of Sodom,
and he brought back Lot his nephew and all his goods and the women and
the people. And the king of Sodom came out to meet him, after his return
from the slaughter of Chodologomor and the kings with him, to the valley
of Sabi; this was the plain of Kings. And Melchizedek, king of Salem,
brought out bread and wine; he was Priest of the Most High. And he
blessed Abram and said: Blessed is Abram by the most high God, who
created the heaven and the earth. And blessed is the most high God, who
has delivered your enemies into your
hand.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[62.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[1,8-11 & 15-17b]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel: See, I have delivered the land before
you; go in and inherit the land which I swore to your fathers, to
Abraham and to Isaac and to Jacob, to give it to them and to their seed
after them. And I spoke to you at that time saying: I alone shall not be
able to bear you. the Lord your God has multiplied you, and behold, you
are to-day as the stars of heaven in multitude. May the Lord the God of
our fathers multiply you a thousand times more than you are, and bless
you as he has spoken to you. And I took from you wise and understanding
and prudent men, and I set them to rule over you, captains of thousands
and hundreds and fifties and tens and recorders for your judges. And I
commanded your judges at that time, saying: Hear cases between your
brethren, and judge rightly between a man and his brother and the
stranger who is with him. You shall not have respect to persons in
judging. You shall hear the small as well as the great. You shall not
shrink before any manÂ’s person; for the judgement is
GodÂ’s.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[63.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Deuteronomy.\
\[[**10,14-18 & 20-21**]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Moses said to the sons of Israel: Behold the heaven and the highest
heaven belong to the Lord your God, the earth and all that is in it. the
Lord preferred your fathers, to love them: and he chose their seed after
them, you above all nations, as it is at this day. So circumcise the
hardness of your heart and stiffen your neck no longer. For the Lord
your God is God of Gods and the Lord of Lords, the great God, mighty and
awesome, who shows no partiality, who takes no bribe. He executes
judgement for the stranger, the orphan and the widow; and loves the
stranger, giving him food and clothing. You shall fear the Lord your God
and serve him, and to him you shall hold fast, and take oaths in his
name. He is your boast, he your God, who has done for you the great and
wonderful things which your eyes have
seen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[15th. Holy Equal of the Apostles Great Prince Vladimir (in Holy Baptism
Basil), Enlightener of Kievan Rus.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[\[[As on May 21st]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[19th. Uncovering of the Relics of St Seraphim of Sarov.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[\[[As on January
17th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[20th. Holy Glorious Prophet
Elias.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[64.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the 3rd Book of Reigns.\
\[[17,1-24]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The word of the Lord came to the Prophet Elias and he said to Achab,
Â‘As the Lord the God of powers lives, the God of Israel, before whom I
stand today, there shall be neither dew nor rain during these years,
except by my mouth.Â’ The word of the Lord came to Elias, saying, Â‘Go
from here and towards the east, and hide yourself in the brook Chorrath,
which is opposite the Jordan. You shall drink from the brook, and I am
commanding the ravens to feed you there.Â’ So he went and settled by the
brook Chorrath, which is opposite the Jordan. The ravens brought him
bread in the morning, and meat in the evening; and he drank water from
the brook. And it cane to pass after some days that the brook dried up,
because there was no rain on the land. Then the word of the Lord came to
Elias, saying, Â‘Arise and go to Sarepta, which belongs to Sidon, and
settle there; for see, I am commanding a widow there to feed you.Â’ And
he arose and went to Sarepta, to the gate of the city. And a widow was
there gathering sticks. And Elias he called after her and said, Â‘Bring
me a little water in a vessel, so that I may drink.Â’ As she was going
to bring it, he called after her and said, Â‘Bring me a morsel of bread
in your hand.Â’ But the woman said, Â‘As the Lord your God lives, I have
nothing baked, only a handful of flour in the jar, and a little oil in
the jug; I am now gathering a couple of sticks, so that I may go home
and prepare it for myself and my children, that we may eat it, and
die.Â’ Elias said to her, Â‘Take courage. Go and do as you have said;
but first make me a little cake of it and bring it to me, and afterwards
make something for yourself and your children. For thus says the Lord
the God of Israel: The jar of flour will not fail and the jug of oil
will not grow less until the day that the Lord sends rain on the whole
land.Â’ The woman went and did as Elias said, and he and she and her
children ate. And from that day the jar of flour did not fail, neither
did the jug of oil grow less, according to the word of the Lord that he
spoke by Elias. After this the son of the woman, the mistress of the
house, became ill; his illness was so severe that there was no breath
left in him. She then said to Elias, Â‘Why do you trouble me, man of
God? Have you come to me to bring my sins to remembrance, and to cause
the death of my son?Â’ But he said to her, Â‘Give me your son.Â’ He took
him from her bosom, carried him up into the upper chamber where he was
lodging, and laid him on his own bed. He cried out to the Lord, Â‘Alas,
Lord my God, you have brought calamity upon the widow with whom I am
staying, whose witness you are, by killing her son.Â’ Then he breathed
upon the child three times, and called on the Lord and said, Â‘Lord my
God, let this childÂ’s life come into him again.Â’ And so it happened
and he cried out. And the Lord listened to the voice of Elias; the
childÂ’s soul came into him again, and he lived. Elias took the child,
brought him down from the upper chamber into the house, and gave him to
his mother. Then Elias said, Â‘See, your son is alive.Â’ So the woman
said to Elias, Â‘Now I know that you are a man of God, and that the word
of the Lord in your mouth is
true.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[65.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the 3rd Book of Reigns.\
\[[18,1.17-46 & 19,1-6]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

The word of the Lord came to Elias the Thesbite in the third year,
saying, Â‘Go, and appear before Achab, and I will give rain on the face
of the land. And it came to pass that when Achab saw Elias, he said to
him, Â‘Is it you, the one who is troubling Israel?Â’ He answered, Â‘I am
not troubling Israel; but you are, and your fatherÂ’s house, by
forsaking the Lord our God and following Baal. Now therefore have all
Israel assemble to me at Mount Carmel, with the four hundred fifty
prophets of Baal and the four hundred prophets of the scared groves, who
eat at JezebelÂ’s table.Â’ So Achab sent to all Israel, and assembled
the prophets at Mount Carmel. Elias said to them, Â‘How long will you go
limping with two different opinions? If the Lord is God, follow him; but
if Baal, then follow him.Â’ Then Elias said to the people, Â‘I, even I
only, am left a prophet of the Lord; but the prophets of the sacred
grove are very many. Let two bulls be given to us; let them choose one
bull for themselves, cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, but put
no fire to it; I will prepare the other bull, but put no fire to it.
Then you call on the name of your god and I will call on the name of the
Lord my God. And the god who answers by fire shall be God.Â’ All the
people answered, Â‘The word you have spoken today is good.Â’ Then Elias
said to the prophets of shame, Â‘Choose for yourselves one calf and
prepare it first; then call on the name of your god, but put no fire to
it.Â’ So they took the calf, prepared it, and called on the name of Baal
from morning until noon, crying, Â‘O Baal, hear us!Â’ But there was no
voice, and no answer. They ran upon the altar that they had made. At
noon Elias the Thesbite mocked them, saying, Â‘Cry aloud! For your god
likes garrulousness.Â’ And when the time of the offering of the oblation
came, there was nothing. Then Elias the Thesbite said to the prophets of
abominations, Â‘Stand aside now, and I will offer my holocaustÂ’. And
Elias said to the people, Â‘Come closeÂ’. And all the people came closer
to him. Elias took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes
of Israel, to whom the word of the Lord had come, saying, Â‘Israel shall
be your nameÂ’. With the stones he built and repaired the altar of the
Lord that had been cast down. Then he made a trench around the altar,
large enough to contain two measures of seed. Next he put the pieces of
wood on the altar he had made, cut the holocaust in pieces, and laid
them on the pieces of wood and piled them on the altar. He said, Â‘Bring
me two jars of water and pour it on the holocaust and on the pieces of
wood.Â’ Then he said, Â‘Do it a second timeÂ’; and they did it a second
time. Again he said, Â‘Do it a third timeÂ’; and they did it a third
time, so that the water ran all around the altar, and filled the trench
also with water. And the prophet Elias cried aloud to heaven and said,
Â‘Lord, God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, hear me today by fire. And
let this people known that you alone the Lord. the God of Israel, that I
am your servant, and that through you I have done all these things, and
that you have turned back the heart of this people to you.Â’ Then fire
from the Lord fell from heaven and consumed the holocaust and the pieces
of wood; and the fire licked up the water that was in the trench, the
stones, and the dust. And the people fell on their faces and said, Â‘The
Lord indeed is God; he is God.Â’ Elias said to them, Â‘Seize the
prophets of Baal; do not let one of them escape.Â’ Then they seized
them; and Elias brought them down to the brook Kishon, and killed them
there. And after this Elias said to Achab, Â‘There is a sound of rushing
rain. Harness your chariot and go down, lest the rain catch you.Â’ Then
Elias went up to the top of Carmel; there he bowed himself down upon the
earth and put his face between his knees and prayed to the Lord. And the
heavens grew black with clouds and wind; there was a heavy rain. Achab
went to Jezreel. Achab told Jezebel his wife all that Elias had done.
Then Jezebel sent to Elias, saying, Â‘Tomorrow I will sacrifice your
life like one of them.Â’ And Elias heard and was afraid; he arose and
fled for his life, and came to Beersheba, in the land of Juda; he left
his servant there. But he himself went a dayÂ’s journey into the
wilderness, and came and sat down under a solitary broom tree. Then he
lay down under the broom tree and fell asleep. Suddenly someone touched
him and said to him, Â‘Arise and eat and drink, for you have a long
journey.Â’ Elias looked, and there at his head was a cake of flour and a
jar of water. He arose, ate and drank, and slept again. The angel of the
Lord came a second time, touched him, and said, Â‘Arise and eat and
drink, for you have a long journey.Â’ He arose, and ate and drank; then
he went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to
mount Horeb. There he entered a cave, and spent the night there. Then
the word of the Lord came to him, saying, Â‘What are you doing here,
Elias?Â’ Elias answered, Â‘I have been very zealous for the Lord, the
Almighty; for the children of Israel have forsaken your covenant, thrown
down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword. I alone am
left, and they are seeking my life, to take it away.Â’ Then the Lord
said to him, Â‘Go, return to your way and you will come to the desert
way of Damascus; and you shall anoint Elissaios son of Shaphat as
prophet in your place.

[66]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[. The
Reading is from the 3rd Book of Reigns.\
\[[19,19-21 & 4 Reigns 2,1.6-14]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\][[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[A day came and Elias found Elissaios son of Saphat, who was ploughing.
Elias passed by him and threw his mantle over him. Elissaios left the
oxen, ran after Elias, and ministered to him. And it came to pass, when
the Lord took Elias in a whirlwind as though up to heaven, that Elias
went with Elissaios to Galgala. Then Elias said to Elissaios, Â‘Stay
here; for the Lord has sent me as far as the Jordan.Â’ But he said, Â‘As
the Lord lives, and as you yourself live, I will not leave you.Â’ So the
two of them went on. Fifty men of the sons of the prophets came, and
stood at some distance from them, as they both were standing by the
Jordan. Then Elias took his mantle and rolled it up, and struck the
water with it; the water was parted to the one side and to the other,
and the two of them crossed on dry ground. When they had crossed, Elias
said to Elissaios, Â‘Ask me what I may do for you, before I am taken up
from you.Â’ Elissaios said, Â‘Please let me inherit a double share of
your spirit.Â’ He responded, Â‘You have asked a hard thing; yet, if you
see me as I am being taken up from you, it will be granted you; if not,
it will not.Â’ It came to pass that as they continued walking and
talking, a chariot of fire and horses of fire separated the two of them,
and Elias was taken up in a whirlwind as if into heaven. Elissaios kept
watching and crying out, Â‘Father, father! The chariots of Israel and
its horsemen!Â’ But when he could no longer see him, Elissaios grasped
his own clothes and tore them in two pieces. He picked up the mantle of
Elias that had fallen from him, and went back and stood on the bank of
the Jordan. Elissaios took the mantle of Elias that had fallen from him,
and struck the water, saying, Â‘Where then is the God of Elias,
Appho?Â’[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2} And so[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}he struck the water, and the water was
parted to the one side and to the other, and Elissaios went over on dry
ground.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[AUGUST]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[6th. The Holy Transfiguration of Our Lord and
[s]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}aviour Jesus
Christ.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[67.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Exodos.\
\[[24:12-18]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord said to Moses, Â‘Come up to me on the mountain, and wait
there; and I will give you the tables of stone, the law and the
commandments, which I have written for their instruction.Â’ When Moses
had arisen, he and Jesus, who attended him, went up onto the mountain of
God.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}And he said to the elders, Â‘Wait here for us, until we come back
to you again; and, see, Aaron and Or are with you; if anyone has a
dispute, let them go to them.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Then Moses
went up onto the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain. The glory
of God came down on Mount Sina, and the cloud covered it six days; and
on the seventh day the Lord called Moses out of the midst of the
cloud.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}Now the appearance of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring
fire on the top of the mountain in the sight of the children of Israel.
And Moses entered the cloud, and went up on the mountain. And he was
there on the mountain for forty days and forty
nights.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[68.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Exodos.\
\[[33:11-23; 34:4-6.8]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as one speaks to oneÂ’s friend.
Then he would return to the camp; but the young servant, Jesus, son of
Navi, did not leave the tent. Moses said to the Lord, Â‘See, you say to
me, Â“Bring up this peopleÂ”; but you have not shown me whom you will
send with me. Yet you have said to me, Â“I know you above all others,
and you have also found favour in my sight.Â” Now if I have found favour
in your sight, show yourself to me, so that I may see you and find
favour in your sight, that I may know that this great nation is your
people.Â‘ And the Lord said to him, Â‘I myself will go before you, and I
will give you rest.Â’ And he said to him, Â‘If you will not go with us
yourself, do not carry me up from here. For how shall it be truly known
that I have found favour in your sight, I and your people, unless you go
with us? In this way, we shall be glorified, I and your people, more
than all the nations.Â’ The Lord said to Moses, Â‘For you I will do this
word that you have spoken; for you have found favour in my sight, and I
know you above all others.Â’ Moses said, Â‘Show me your own glory.Â’ And
he said, Â‘I will pass by you in my glory, and will proclaim before you
my name, Â“The LordÂ”; and I will be have mercy on those on whom I will
have mercy, and will have pity on those on whom I will have pity.Â’ And
he said, Â‘You cannot see my face; for no human shall see my face and
live.Â’ And the Lord said, Â‘See, there is a place by me; stand on the
rock. And while my glory passes by I will put you in a cleft of the
rock, and I will cover you with my hand until I have passed by; then I
will take away my hand, and you shall see my back; but my face shall not
be seen by you.Â’ So Moses rose early in the morning and went up on
Mount Sina, as the Lord had commanded him. The Lord descended in the
cloud and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name, Â‘The Lord. The
Lord passed before his face, and proclaimed, Â‘The Lord, the Lord, God
compassionate and merciful, slow to anger, and full of mercy and
trueÂ’.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And Moses quickly bowed to the
earth, and worshipped the
Lord.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[69.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from Third Book of Reigns.\
\[[19:3-9.11-13.15-16]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[And Elias heard and was afraid; he arose and fled for his life, and
came to Beersheba, in the land of Juda; he left his servant there. But
he himself went a dayÂ’s journey into the wilderness, and came and sat
down under a solitary broom tree. Then he lay down under the broom tree
and fell asleep. Suddenly someone touched him and said to him, Â‘Arise
and eat and drink, for you have a long journey.Â’ Elias looked, and
there at his head was a cake of flour and a jar of water. He arose, ate
and drank, and slept again. The angel of the Lord came a second time,
touched him, and said, Â‘Arise and eat and drink, for you have a long
journey.Â’ He arose, and ate and drank; then he went in the strength of
that food forty days and forty nights to mount Horeb. There he entered a
cave, and spent the night there. Then the word of the Lord came to him,
saying, Â‘Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the Lord. And
behold, the Lord will pass by.Â’ And a great and strong wind rent the
mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before the Lord, but the Lord
was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was
not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was
not in the fire; and after the fire the sound of a gentle breeze. And
when Elias heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle and went out and
stood by the cave. Then the Lord said to him, Â‘Go, return to your way
and you will come to the desert way of Damascus; and you shall anoint
Elissaios son of Shaphat as prophet in your
place.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

**9th. Holy Apostle Matthias.**

[70.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Acts of the Apostles\
\[[1:15-26]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In those days Peter stood up among the brethren (the company of persons
was in all about a hundred and twenty), and said, Â‘Brethren, the
scripture had to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit foretold by the
mouth of David, concerning Judas who was guide to those who arrested
Jesus. For he was numbered among us, and was allotted his share in this
ministry. (Now this man bought a field with the reward of his
wickedness; and falling headlong he burst open in the middle and all his
bowels gushed out. And it became known to all the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, so that the field was called in their language
Â“AkeldamachÂ”, that is, Â“Field of BloodÂ”.) For it is written in the
book of Psalms, Â“Let his encampment become desolate, and let there be
no one to live in itÂ”; and Â“[l]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}et
another take his office.Â” So one of the men who have accompanied us
during all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us,
beginning from the baptism of John until the day when he was taken up
from us Â— one of these men must become with us a witness to his
resurrection.Â’ And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who
was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And
they prayed and said, Â‘You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, show
which one of these two you have chosen to take the place in this
ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned aside, to go to his own
place.Â’[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}And they lots to them, and the
lot fell on Matthias; and he was enrolled with the eleven
apostles.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Reading
45.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Reading
46.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt"}

[13th. St Tikhon, Bishop of Voronezh, Wonderworker of
Zadonsk.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[ \[[As on May
9th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[15th. The Dormition of Our Most Holy Lady Mother of God and Ever-Virgin
Mary.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold"}[ \[[As on March
25th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[29th. The Beheading of the Holy Glorious Prophet Forerunner and Baptist
John.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[ \[[As on February
24th]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\]]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
This reading in the Menaion has been shortened in various places,
notably in the account of the sacrifice and EliasÂ’s vision at Horeb.
]{style="font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-family: Book Antiqua"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
The LXX has here either
]{style="font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[*[appho]{style="font-family: Book Antiqua; mso-ansi-language: EL"}*]{lang="EL"}[
or
]{style="font-family:"Book Antiqua""}[*[aphpho]{style="font-family: Book Antiqua; mso-ansi-language: EL"}*]{lang="EL"}[,
both of which are odd being simply near transliterations of the Hebrew,
which means something like Â‘Yea, heÂ’, Â‘Even heÂ’. St Jerome has
Â‘nunc etiamÂ’, which makes sense, but is somewhat
free.]{style="font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
