\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](prophetologion.md) \]
\[ [Readings September to November](readings_september_to_november.md) \]
\[ Readings December \]
\[ [Readings for January](readings_for_january.md) \]
\[ [Readings February to April](Readings%20February%20to%20April.md) \]
\[ [Readings May to August](readings_may_to_august.md) \]

[READINGS FOR
VESPERS]{style="font-size:24.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[]{style="font-size:16.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

DECEMBER
--------

[5th. Our Venerable Father Savvas the Sanctified.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[\[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:black;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[As on January
17th]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\][]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[6th. Our Father among the [s]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}aints
Nicolas, Archbishop of Myra in Lykia,\
the Wonderworker.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:
bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[\[[As on May
9th]{style="color:red"}\][]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[18th-24th. Sunday before the Nativity[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}of[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}Christ.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;letter-spacing:-.15pt;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[\[[See July
13th]{style="color:red"}\][]{style="color:red"}]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;letter-spacing:-.15pt;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[24th. Eve of the Nativity of
Christ.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[ROYAL HOURS]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[FIRST HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone
4.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[\[[Psalm
2:7-8]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]**]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[The Lord said to me, Â‘You are my Son, \* today I have begotten
youÂ’.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[Ask of me, and I
shall give you the Nations as your
inheritance.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[85.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Micheas.\
\[[5:1-3]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: And you Bethlehem, house of Ephratha, are not least
among the thousands of Juda; for from you there will come forth for me
the one who is to be ruler in Israel, and his goings out are from the
beginning, from eternity. Because of this he will give them until the
moment that she who bears child shall bring to birth; and the remainder
of his brethren will return to the children of Israel. And he will stand
and will see, and shepherd his flock in the strength of the Lord, and
they will abide in the glory of the name of the Lord his God; for now
they will be magnified even to the extremities of the
earth.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[86]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[.
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The Reading is
from the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.\
\[[1:1-12]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In many and varied ways God spoke of old to our fathers by the
prophets; but in these last days he has spoken to us by a Son, whom he
appointed the heir of all things, through whom also he created the ages.
He is the radiance of his glory and the very imprint of his substance,
upholding the universe by the word of his power. When he had made
purification for our sins, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty
on high, having become as much superior to angels as the name he has
obtained is more excellent than theirs. For to which of the angels did
God ever say, Â‘You are my Son, today I have begotten youÂ’? Or again,
Â‘I will be to him a father, and he shall be to me a sonÂ’? And again,
when he brings the first-born into the world, he says, Â‘Let all GodÂ’s
angels worship him.Â’ Of the angels he says, Â‘Who makes his angels
spirits and his ministers flames of fire.Â’ But to the Son he says,
Â‘Your throne, O God, is to age on age, the[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}sceptre of justice is the sceptre of your
kingdom. You have loved justice and hated iniquity; therefore God, your
God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness beyond your comrades.Â’
And, Â‘You, Lord, founded the earth in the beginning, and the heavens
are the work of your hands; they will perish, but you remain; they will
all grow old like a garment, like a mantle you will roll them up, and
they will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will never
end.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[THIRD HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone
4.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua""}[\[[Isaias 9:6]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}[[         
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[For a Child has been born for us, \* and a Son has been given to
us.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[ Whose government is upon his
shoulder.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[87]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[
The Reading is from the Prophecy of Jeremias.\
\[[Baruch 3:36-38. 4:1-4]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[This is our God, and there shall be none other reckoned in comparison
with him. He has found out all the way of knowledge, and given it to
Jacob his servant and Israel his beloved. After this he appeared on
earth and lived among men. This is the book of the commandments of God,
and the law which exists for ever; all those who keep it fast will have
life; but those who abandon it will die. Turn back Jacob, and lay hold
of it, walk in the presence of its light to be illumined. Do not give
your glory to another, and what is profitable to you to a foreign
nation.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[88.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The Reading is
from the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians.\
\[[3:23-29]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Brethren, before faith came, we were confined under the law, kept under
restraint until faith should be revealed. So that the law was our
custodian until Christ came, that we might be justified by faith. But
now that faith has come, we are no longer under a custodian; for in
Christ Jesus you are all children of God, through faith. For as many of
you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. There is
neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free, there is neither
male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus. And if you are
ChristÂ’s, then you are AbrahamÂ’s offspring, heirs according to
promise.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[SIXTH HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone
8.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua""}[\[[Psalm 109:3.1]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}[]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[From the womb before the Morning Star \* I have begotten
you.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}[ The Lord said to my Lord, Â‘Sit at my right hand, until I make
your enemies a footstool for your
feet.Â’]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[89.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[7:10-16 & 8:1-4, 8-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

Again the Lord spoke to Ahaz, Â‘Ask a sign of the Lord your God; in the
depth or in the height.Â’ But Ahaz said, Â‘I will not ask, and I will
not put the Lord to the test.Â’ And he \[Isaias\] said, Â‘Hear then, O
house of David! Is it a little thing for you to contend with men, and
how do you contend with the Lord? Therefore the Lord himself will give
you a sign. Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and they
shall call his name Emmanuel. He shall eat butter and honey before he
knows how to prefer evil or choose good. For before the child knows good
or evil, he refuses the evil to choose the good. Then the Lord said to
me, Â“Take for yourself a large new volume and write upon it in with a
manÂ’s pen, Of making a rapid plunder of spoils; for it is at hand. And
get me witnesses, reliable men, Urias the priest and Zachary the son of
Barachias. And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived and bore a
son. Then the Lord said to me, Â“Call his name
Despoil-quickly-plunder-rapidly; for before the child knows how to cry
Â‘FatherÂ’ or Â‘Mother,Â’ he will take the power of Damascus and the
spoil of Samaria before the king of the Assyrians.Â” Know you nations
and be worsted; give ear, as far as the extremity of the earth; for if
again you have become strong, again you will be worsted. And whatever
counsel you take, the Lord will scatter it; and whatever word you speak,
it will not remain in you, for God is with us.Â’

[90.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.\
\[[1:10-14 & 2:1-3]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Â‘You, Lord, founded the earth in the beginning, and the heavens are
the work of your hands; they will perish, but you remain; they will all
grow old like a garment, like a mantle you will roll them up, and they
will be changed. But you are the same, and your years will never end.Â’
But to what angel has he ever said, Â‘Sit at my right hand, till I make
your enemies a footstool for your feetÂ’? Are they not all ministering
spirits sent forth to serve, for the sake of those who are to inherit
salvation? Therefore we must pay the closer attention to what we have
heard, lest we drift away from it. For if the word spoken by angels was
sure and every transgression or disobedience received a just
retribution, how shall we escape if we neglect such a great salvation?
It was declared at first by the Lord, and it was attested to us by those
who heard him.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[NINTH HOUR]{style="color:red"}

[Prokeimenon of the Prophecy. Tone
4.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:
"Book Antiqua""}[\[[Psalm 86:5.1]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua";font-style:normal"}[]{style="font-size:
14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Sion is our mother, a man will say; \* and a man has been born in
her.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;
color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[His foundations
are in the holy
mountains.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[91.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The Reading is
from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[9:16-7]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[A child has been born for us, a son has been given to us; whose
government is upon his shoulder, and his name will be called Â‘Angel of
Great Counsel, Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty God, Potentate, Prince of
Peace, Father of the age to come.Â’ For I will bring peace upon princes,
peace and health to him. Great his government, and of his peace there is
no bound, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish
it, and to uphold it with judgement and with justice from henceforth and
for ever more. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will do
this.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[92.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The Reading from
the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.\
\[[2:11-18]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Brethren, the One who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all
from One. For this reason he is not ashamed to call them brethren,
saying: I will proclaim your name to my brethren, in the midst of the
church I will praise you. And again: I will put my trust in him. And
again: Here am I, and children whom God has given me. Since, therefore,
the children share flesh and blood, he himself likewise shared the same
things, so that through death he might destroy the one who has the power
of death, that is the devil, and free those who all their lives were
held in slavery by the fear of death. For it is clear he did not on
himself the nature of Angels, but he took on that of the descendants of
Abraham. Therefore he had to become like his brethren in every respect,
so that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest in the service
of God, to make atonement for the sins of the people. For because he
himself was tested by what he suffered, he is able to help those who are
being tested.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

#### [VESPERS]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;
font-weight:normal;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#vespers align="center"}

[Reading
14.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[93.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}**[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}**[The Reading is
from Numbers.\
\[[24:2-3, 5-9, 17-18]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[And the Spirit of God came upon Balaam, and he took up his discourse,
and said, Â“How fair are your houses, O Jacob, your tents, O Israel!
Like shady groves, like gardens beside a river, like tents that the Lord
has planted, like cedar trees beside the waters. A man shall chrome
forth from his seed and will be lord over many nations, and his kingdom
shall be exalted and increased. God led him out of Egypt; he has as it
were the glory of the unicorn, he shall eat up the nations of his
adversaries, and suck the marrow of their fat bones, and pierce the foe
through with his arrows. He couched, he lay down like a lion, and like a
young lion; who will rouse him? Blessed be every one who blesses you,
and cursed be every one who curses you.Â” A star shall come forth out of
Jacob, and a man shall rise out of Israel; and shall crush the princes
of Moab, and plunder all the sons of Seth. Edom shall be an inheritance,
Esau his foe shall be an inheritance, while Israel did
valiantly.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[94.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[ The
Reading from the Prophecy of Micheas.\
\[[4:6-7 & 5:1-3]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[In those days, says the Lord, I will gather her that is bruised, and
her that has been driven out I will receive, and those whom I have
driven out; and her that has been bruised I will make into a remnant;
and her that has been cast out into a strong nation; and the Lord will
reign over them in Mount Sion from this henceforth and for ever more.
Thus says the Lord: And you Bethlehem, house of Ephratha, are not least
among the thousands of Juda; for from you there will come forth for me
the one who is to be ruler in Israel, and his goings out are from the
beginning, from eternity. Because of this he will give them until the
moment that she who bears child shall bring to birth; and the remainder
of his brethren will return to the children of Israel. And he will stand
and will see, and shepherd his flock in the strength of the Lord, and
they will abide in the glory of the name of the Lord his God; for now
they will be magnified even to the extremities of the
earth.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[95*.*]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[
The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[11:1-10]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Thus says the Lord: There shall come forth a rod from the root of
Jesse, and a flower shall grow out of the root. And the Spirit of the
Lord God shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
the spirit of counsel and strength, the spirit of knowledge and piety.
The spirit of the fear of the Lord will fill him. He shall not judge by
glory nor reprove by hearsay; but he will give judgement for the lowly
with justice, and reprove with equity the glorious ones of the earth;
and he shall smite the earth with the word of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips he shall destroy the wicked. And he will have his
loins girt with justice, and his sides clothed with truth. Then the wolf
shall feed with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid,
and the calf and the bull and the lion will feed together, and a little
child shall lead them. The ox and the bear shall feed together; their
young shall be together; and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. An
infant child shall put its hand over the hole of asps, and the weaned
child its hand on the nest of the offspring of asps. They shall not hurt
or be able to destroy anyone on my holy mountain; for the whole earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as much water covers the sea.
In that day there shall be the root of Jesse, and he that shall arise to
rule nations; in him shall the nations hope, and his rest shall be
honour.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[Reading
88.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[96.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}*[
]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*[The Reading is
from the Prophecy of Daniel.\
\[[2:31-36, 44-45]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

Daniel said to Nabuchodonosor, Â“You saw, O king, and behold, a great
image. This image, mighty and of exceeding brightness, stood before you,
and its appearance was lightening. The head of this image was of pure
gold, its hands, breast and arms of silver, its belly and thighs of
bronze, its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of clay. As
you looked, a stone was cut out from a mountain by no human hand, and it
smote the image on its feet of iron and clay, and broke them in pieces;
then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold, all
together were broken in pieces, and became like the chaff of the summer
threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, so that not a trace of
them could be found. But the stone that struck the image became a great
mountain and filled the whole earth. This was the dream; now we will
tell the king its interpretation. the God of heaven will set up a
kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall this kingdom be left to
another people. It shall crush all these kingdoms and bring them to an
end, and it shall stand forever; just as you saw that a stone was cut
from the mountain not by hands, and that it crushed the iron, the
bronze, the clay, the silver, and the gold. The great God has informed
the king what shall be hereafter. The dream is certain, and its
interpretation trustworthy.Â”

[97. ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red"}[The
Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.\
\[[9:6-7]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

[A child has been born for us, a son has been given to us; whose
government is upon his shoulder, and his name will be called Â“Angel of
Great Counsel, Wonderful Counsellor, Mighty God, Potentate, Prince of
Peace, Father of the age to come.Â” For I will bring peace upon princes,
peace and health to him. Great his government, and of his peace there is
no bound, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish
it, and to uphold it with judgement and with justice from henceforth and
for ever more. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will do
this.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Reading
90.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[for the dedication of a church]{style="font-size: 18.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-family: Book Antiqua; color: red; font-weight: normal; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold; text-transform: uppercase"} {#for-the-dedication-of-a-church style="margin-bottom:0cm;margin-bottom:.0001pt" align="center"}
==========================================================================================================================================================================================================

[The Reading is from the Third Book of Reigns.\
\[[10, 22Â–23. 27Â–31; 8, 22Â–23a]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

Solomon stood before the Altar of the Lord, in front of the whole
Assembly of Israel, and spread out his hands to heaven and said, Â‘Lord
God of Israel, there is no god like you in heaven above or on earth
below. If heaven and the highest heaven will not be adequate for you,
how much less then this House which I have built in your name? And you,
Lord God of Israel, will look upon my supplication, to hear the
supplication and the prayer which your servant makes before you this
day, that your eyes may be open toÂ­wards this house day and night,
towards this place of which you have said, Â“My name will be thereÂ”, to
hearken to the prayer which your serÂ­vant makes at this place day and
night. And you will hearken to the supplicaÂ­tion of your servant and of
your people Israel, whatever they may pray for at this place, and you
will hearken in the place of your habitation in heaven, and you will act
be merciful to them.Â’

[ ]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
