\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ Samaritan Woman \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ [Akathist](akathist.md) \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

CANON OF THE SAMARITAN WOMAN
============================

**With an acrostic in the 9th Ode: J o s e p h.**

Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki.

Ode 1. Tone 4. The Irmos.

‘You struck Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharao in the sea, and saved a
people from slavery, as they sang Moses’ song of victory: For he has
been glorified.’

****

Troparia.

The Buried has arisen, and with him raised the human race; let all
creation rejoice, and let all the spiritual clouds to-day clearly rain
down justice.

Having willingly accepted the cross in the flesh, you rose on the third
day from the dead, Lord, source of life, emptying Hell’s storehouses and
leading out the fettered souls.

O Lord, who lay the beams of your chambers on the water, you are the
water of life and you granted hallowed streams to the woman of Samaria
when she asked, for she recognised your compassion.

Glory.

O Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, as maker of all things save those who
glorify you with pure faith, and grant pardon of our sins, as you are
supremely good.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Hail throne of fire, hail lampstand all of gold, hail cloud of light,
hail palace of the Word, and spiritual table, who fittingly carry
Christ, the bread of life.

****

Ode 3. The Irmos.

‘My heart is established in the Lord, who grants the prayer of him who
prays; for He has weakened the mighty bow, and the weak are girded with
power.’

****

Troparia.

Willingly you were lifted up on the tree, O Word, and seeing it the
rocks were rent, and all creation was shaken, and the dead arose from
the graves as from sleep.

When all the souls of the just saw you coming to Hell with your soul, O
Word, they were released from their eternal chains as they hymned your
power beyond understanding.

Why are you amazed? Why with spices do you seek the Master in a grave, O
Women? He has risen, and has raised the world with himself, cried the
dazzling Angel to the Myrrhbearers.

As Life and the source of immortality you sat down by the source, O
Merciful, and filled with your all-wise streams the Woman of Samaria who
asked and hymned you.

Glory.

One God in Trinity is hymned over all, the Father, Son and divine
Spirit, whom the armies of heaven glorify in fear, as they clearly cry
out: Holy, Holy, Holy, are you to the ages.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Beyond explanation you conceived in the womb, O Virgin Mother, and
beyond understanding and reason you gave birth to the God of all things,
remaining a Virgin as before child-birth, O Bride of God.

****

Ode 4. The Irmos.

‘I heard your report, Lord, and was afraid: I knew your works and I was
astounded, for the earth is full of your praise.’

****

Troparia.

Let the heavens rejoice, let all creation keep the feast: the Lord has
risen and appeared to all his wise Apostles.

Your power, Death, was swallowed up, when Christ died: at his Rising as
from bridal chambers the dead have come from the graves.

Why do you lament, O women? Why seek the immortal with spices? He has
risen as he said, the Angel cried to the Myrrhbearers.

To the woman of Samaria, when she asked, Lord, you gave water, the
knowledge of your might; therefore for all ages she will never thirst as
she sings your praise.

Glory.

O Trinity beyond being, Father, Word and divine Spirit, identical in
power, together without beginning, save us all, who in faith sing your
praise.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The lawgiver saw you as a bush unburned: Daniel recognised you as a holy
mountain, O Sovereign Lady, only Virgin-mother.

****

Ode 5. The Irmos.

‘Make the light of your commandments dawn for me, O Lord, for my spirit
rises early for You, O Christ, and hymns You: for You are our God and to
You I have run for refuge, O king of peace.’

****

Troparia.

Reaching your holy grave at early dawn, the Myrrhbearers saw a shining
youth, and were amazed on learning of your divine Rising, O Christ.

Death has been slain, Hell taken prisoner, those in chains freed by the
Resurrection of Christ. Let us rejoice and clap our hands and radiantly
keep the feast.

Apostles leap for joy, Angels dance, all born of earth be glad: the Lord
has risen, corruption has been banished, grief has ceased, and Adam
dances.

O Lord, as source of life you once gave the water of forgiveness and
knowledge to a woman of Samaria when she asked: therefore we praise your
inexpressible mercies.

Glory.

We honour a three-personned Unity, consubstantial Trinity, Father, Word
and Holy Spirit, inseparable by nature, one God, Maker and Lord and
Master of all.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O Pure one, we name you gate without passage, field untilled, ark
bearing the Manna, jar, lampstand and censer of the immaterial coal.

****

Ode 6. The Irmos.

‘Let not the stormy waters drown me, let not the deep swallow me up: for
I have been cast into the depths of the heart of the sea of my evils;
therefore I cry to you as Jonas: May my life ascend from corruption to
you, our God.’

****

Troparia.

Jesu, the transgressors nailed you to a cross, and pierced you with a
lance, O Christ, and Joseph laid you for burial in a new tomb; from
which you rose with glory, raising with you all creation, which hymns
your might.

Powerfully you smashed the bolts and gates of Hell, O Master, and rose
as God, and meeting the women you said to them: Rejoice, and you sent
them to say to the Disciples: The Living has arisen, and he has appeared
giving light to the ends of the earth.

Why do you weep? Why bring spices as to a mortal, O women? Christ has
arisen, leaving the grave clothes behind empty, cried the youth who
appeared of old flashing like lightning; Go, announce the Resurrection
to his friends.

Good Lord, you are an inexhaustible stream of life, an abyss of mercy.
As you journeyed you sat down by the Well of the Oath, and cried out to
the woman of Samaria: Give me water to drink, that you may receive
streams of forgiveness.

Glory.

With the bodiless powers, I hymn in faith the Father without beginning,
and the Son equal in majesty, and the consubstantial Spirit, one
Essence, and nature and glory, and one kingship, God and Maker of all,
who holds the universe together.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Pure one, we hymn you, as only Virgin who has given birth and kept her
womb incorrupt, throne of the Lord, gate and mountain, and spiritual
lampstand, bridal chamber of God, all light, and manifest tabernacle of
glory, ark and jar and table.

****

Ode 7. The Irmos.

‘Do not hand us over for ever, for your name’s sake, do not scatter your
covenant and do not withdraw your mercy from us, O Lord the God of our
fathers, highly exalted unto the ages.’

****

Troparia.

O merciful Christ, willingly you were numbered among the lawless at the
moment of your divine Passion; seeing it the earth was shaken and the
rocks were rent by your all-effecting wish, O Infinite, and the dead
from time’s beginning arose.

With your soul you went down to the lower regions of Hell; bravely you
led out all the prisoners that death, the bitter tyrant, held since
time’s beginning, as they cried out to you, Christ our God: Glory to
your dread dispensation!

Why do you seek the eternally living with the dead? He has risen, as he
said. Here, as you see, the graveclothes are empty, the tomb is empty,
the young man who appeared said to the Women: Go with haste, tell the
Apostles.

You are the water of life, the Woman of Samaria cried out to Christ;
therefore, O Word, give me, who am ever thirsty, your divine grace to
drink, that I may no longer, Lord Jesu, be mastered by the drought of
ignorance, but may proclaim your wonderful works.

Glory.

We hymn the Father and the Son and the divine Spirit, Trinity by nature
undivided, divided by persons, one united Essence, without beginning,
Maker of all and God, whom all the ranks of heaven praise.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

After your dread child-birth, holy Mother of God, you were kept a pure
Virgin; therefore all the choirs of Angels and all generations of
mankind hymn you with never silent voices as the pure place which
confined the infinite.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

‘You established the universe, Master, by your wisdom; and laid the
foundation of the earth, as you know how, upon the base of the waters;
therefore we all cry out in song: You works of the Lord, unceasingly
bless the Lord.’

****

Troparia.

You endured death by your will, only Immortal, you took hell captive,
you smashed the gates of brass, heavenly King, and released the
prisoners held there since time’s beginning, who unceasingly hymn the
might of your goodness.

You were lifted up willingly on the Cross, O Longsuffering, and the
rocks were split, the sun was quenched, the veil of the temple was rent
in two, and the earth was shaken, and Hell, the laughing stock, trembled
with fright and released all his prisoners.

You, Lord, the light that never sets and life of all, appeared to those
sitting in darkness; therefore when the just saw you, O Word, they
leaped for joy and cried aloud: You have come to free all from their
chains; we praise your might.

You sat next the source at the sixth hour, O Saviour, and granted the
Woman of Samaria living water and streams of knowledge in your great
compassion; with her we all cry out in song: You works of the Lord,
unceasingly bless the Lord.

Glory.

We praise the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without
beginning and the Holy Spirit, the three one God without confusion,
inseparable, Creator of all, identical in power, might of sovereign
freedom, and we cry out: You works of the Lord, unceasingly bless the
Lord.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Isaias was cleansed by a coal, proclaiming in advance the spiritual
coal, incarnate of you beyond understanding, O Virgin, and which burns
up all the material sins of mortals, and through pity deifies our
nature, O immaculate.

****

Ode 9. The Irmos.

‘He has shown strength with his arm ; he has put down the mighty from
their thrones, and exalted the humble, the God of Israel, by whom the
Dayspring from on high has visited us, and set us in the way of peace.’

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif){width="27" height="49"}esus
the life of all was seen hanged willingly on a Tree; and seeing it the
earth was shaken, and many bodies of the Saints that slept visibly
arose, and Hell’s prison was shaken.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif){width="43" height="42"}ut
of the tomb, fair as a bridegroom from his chamber, you came, having
abolished the tyranny of death, and smashed the bolts of Hell by your
divine power, and illumined the world by the spiritual light of your
Rising.

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif){width="28"
height="44"}piritual choirs now let us all establish and let us cry: The
Lord has risen; let the earth rejoice and the heavens be glad, let the
clouds rain down showers of justice for us who radiantly celebrate and
sing Christ’s praise.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif){width="32" height="47"}ven
as he poured out teachings richly, the Lord, source of blessings, life
of all living, cried out to the woman, ‘Grant me water to drink, that I
may give you water which dries up the sources of your sins’.

Glory.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif){width="33" height="55"}ure
single light, yet without parts, is the triple-sunned unity; the Father
who has no beginning, Son and Spirit, one Godhead, life and maker of
all. Let us the faithful, with the Bodiless ones, praise the Godhead, as
we chant thrice-holy songs.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif){width="38"
height="45"}aving become the dwelling of the Light, O Pure one, illumine
the pupils of my soul, blackened by the many wiles of the foe, and make
me worthy to see clearly with a pure heart the Splendour that shone from
you beyond understanding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
