\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone7.md) \] \[ Saturday Evening \]
\[ [Sunday Midnight](sun7nc.md) \] \[ [Sunday Matins](sun7mat.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers6.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday%20matins.md) \]

PERIOD OF TONE 7
================

**ON SATURDAY EVENING**

AT SMALL VESPERS
----------------

****

At Lord,

I have cried… **we insert 4 Stichera, and sing 3 Resurrection Stichera
from the Oktoichos, doubling the 1st.**

Glory. Both now.

****

Dogmatic Theotokion. Tone 7.

Truly fearful and ineffable is the mystery that has been wrought in you,
O Undefiled; for you gave birth to the Word, cause of all things, beyond
cause and word, who became embodied by the holy Spirit, taking his flesh
from you, while his own nature remained unchanged. For when both had
come together self-subsistently in a single hypostasis, he came forth
double in nature, wholly God and wholly man, displaying the wholeness in
both with active properties. For having suffered the passion in the
flesh on the Cross, he himself remained impassible in his godhead;
having died as a mortal he came to life again as God on the third day,
after destroying the might of death and delivering humanity from
corruption. O Mother of God, ask him as the Redeemer and Saviour of our
race to send down to us the great mercy of his compassion.

****

Aposticha. The 1st of the Resurrection and the following Prosomia of the
Mother of God.

Verse:

I shall remember you name in every generation and generation. ****

Despising all things.

O Virgin, you became the Dayspring of the spiritual Sun, that came upon
the sunset of our nature; but as you have boldness, all-praised Mother
of God, beseech him to free our souls from numberless offences.

****

Verse:

Listen, daughter, and see, and incline your ear; and forget your people
and your father’s house.

Rod out Jesse’s root, O Virgin, you manifestly gave bud to the one who
uprooted wholly the plants of deception; but as you have boldness, O
all-praised, implore him without ceasing to root out the passions of my
heart, and to plant in it the fear of him and save me.

****

Verse:

The rich among the people of the land will entreat your favour.

Gate of God, All-holy, deliver me from the gates of Hades and show me
too the way of repentance, through which I may find the gate that leads
to life. Guide of those who have gone astray, watch over the race of
faithful people and save our souls.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

From you, all-holy Virgin Mother of God, was born Christ our God, who is
truly God before the ages and lately man; as God existing eternally, as
man he has come to be for our sake. For in himself he preserves the
property of each nature, causing the one to shine forth by wonders,
confirming the other by sufferings. Therefore one and the same he both
dies as man and rises again as God. Implore him, O honoured one who knew
not wedlock, that our souls may be saved.

****

Resurrection Apolytikion, and Dismissal.

AT GREAT VESPERS

****

After the Opening Psalm and the first Kathisma of the Psalter, at

Lord, I have cried **we insert 10 Stichera, and we sing 7 Resurrection
Stichera and 3 from the Menaion.**

Tone 7

Come, let us rejoice in the Lord who has smashed the might of death and
enlightened the human race, as we cry with the Bodiless Powers: Our
Creator and Saviour, glory to you!

For us, O Saviour, you endured the Cross and burial; but as God by your
death you put death to death; and so we worship your Resurrection on the
third day. Lord, glory to you!

The Apostles marvelled when they saw the Creator’s Rising and cried
aloud the angelic hymn of praise: This is the glory of the Church, this
is the wealth of the Kingdom. O Lord, who suffered for us, glory to you!

****

Other Stichera by Anatolios.

Though you were seized by lawless men, O Christ, yet you are my God, and
I am not ashamed; your back was scourged, I do not deny you; You were
nailed to a Cross, and I do not hide. I make my boast in your Rising;
for your death is my life. All-powerful Lord who love mankind, glory to
you!

Fulfilling David’s prophecy Christ revealed his own greatness in Sion to
his Disciples, showing that he was praised and ever glorified with the
Father and the Holy Spirit; before without flesh as Word. later for us
incarnate and put to death as man, and risen with authority as he loves
mankind.

You descended into Hell as you willed, O Christ, you despoiled death as
God and master; and you rose on the third day, raising with yourself
from the bonds of Hell and from corruption Adam as he cried and said:
Glory to your Resurrection, only lover of mankind.

You were laid in a tomb, O Lord, as one who slept and you rose on the
third day as one powerful in strength, raising Adam with yourself from
the corruption of death, as all-powerful.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

You were known as a Mother beyond nature, O Mother of God; you remained
a Virgin beyond reason and understanding; no tongue can expound the
marvel of your child-bearing; for while your conceiving, Pure One, was
wondrous, the manner of your bearing child cannot be comprehended, for
wherever God wills the order of nature is overthrown. Therefore as we
all acknowledge you to be Mother of God we implore you insistently:
Intercede that our souls may be saved.

Entrance, O Joyful Light… and the Prokeimenon of the day.

****

Resurrection Stichera of the Aposticha.

Tone 7

You rose from the tomb, Saviour of the world, and with your flesh you
raised mankind. Lord, glory to you!

Verse: The Lord is king, he has robed himself in majesty. The Lord has
robed and girded himself with power.

****

In alphabetical order.

Come, let us worship the one who rose from the dead and enlightened all
things; for he has freed us from the tyranny of Hell through his Rising
on the third day so granting us life and his great mercy.

****

Verse:

He has made the world firm; it will not be shaken.

O Christ, by descending below Hell you despoiled death, and by rising on
the third day you raised us with you as we glorified your all-powerful
Rising. Lord, glory to you!

****

Verse:

Holiness befits your house, O Lord, to length of days.

Fearful you appeared, Lord, as you lay in the tomb; but rising on the
third day in power you raised with you Adam, who cried: Glory to your
Resurrection, only lover of mankind.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

As all we born of earth flee to your protection, Sovereign Lady, we cry
out to you: Mother of God, our hope, deliver us from unnumbered faults
and save our souls.

****

Apolytikion

You abolished death by your Cross, you opened Paradise to the Thief, you
transformed the Myrrhbearers’ lament and ordered your Apostles to
proclaim: that you had risen, O Christ God, granting the world your
great mercy.

****

Theotokion.

As the treasure-house of our Resurrection, All-praised Lady, bring up
from the pit and from the deep of offences those who have put their
trust in you; for you saved those who were subject to sin by giving
birth to Salvation. You were Virgin before bearing child, Virgin in
bearing child and after bearing child you are still Virgin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
