\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone4.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat4ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun4nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins and Liturgy](sun4mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins3.md) \] \[ Tuesday Matins \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers3.md) \]

ON TUESDAY MORNING
==================

AT MATINS
---------

****

After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of Compunction.

Tone 4.

Visit my humble soul, Lord, that has squandered its whole life in sins;
receive me as you did the Harlot and save me.

****

Verse:

** O Lord, do not rebuke me your anger; nor chastise me in your rage.

As I sail the sea of this present life I think on the abyss of my many
evils, and as I have no thought as helmsman, I cry to you in Peter’s
words. Save me, Christ God, save me as You love mankind!

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We have acknowledged that the Word of the Father, Christ our God, became
incarnate of you, Virgin Mother of God, alone pure, alone blessed;
therefore as we hymn you without ceasing we magnify you.

****

After the 2nd reading, others.

When I consider the sea of my many offences, I do not dare to raise my
eyes and ask for pardon; but give compunction leading to repentance,
Lord, and save me.

****

Verse:

** O Lord, do not rebuke me your anger; nor chastise me in your rage.

The mind of my wretched soul, darkened by the fog of the passions and
the pleasures of life does not come towards thought of compunction; but
have pity, O Saviour, and give even me, coward that I am, a thought of
compunction, that before the end I too may cry out to your compassion, O
Lord: Christ my Saviour, in my despair save me, the unworthy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We magnify you, Mother of God, as we cry aloud: Hail Cloud of the never
setting light, who carried in your bosom the Lord of glory!

****

After the 3rd reading, others.

The desert-loving dove, the holy Baptist, preaching repentance and
revealing Christ become man, has become the advocate of all who sin,
unendingly helping those who are storm-tossed. At his intercessions, O
Christ, save your world.

****

Verse:

** God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel. ****

Of the Martyrs. Same melody.

Armed with the Cross your Champions conquered the devices of the enemy,
source of evil, O Christ our God: they shone like beacons, guiding
mortals; they grant healings to those who ask in faith. At their
intercessions save our souls.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. The same.**

O All-Immaculate, who alone bore the Maker of all, who alone adorned
humanity by your child-bearing, deliver me from the snares of cunning
Beliar, stand me on the rock of Christ’s wishes, as you earnestly
entreat him, to whom you gave a body.

****

Canon of Compunction, whose acrostic, without the Theotokia, is:

Wash me with cleansing tears, O Word. Joseph.

****

Ode 1. Tone 4. The Irmos.

By smiting Egypt and drowning the tyrant Pharaoh in the sea you saved a
people from slavery who sang like Moses a song of victory, for he has
been glorified.

****

Troparia.

O Lord, do not, rebuke me openly who have done deeds of darkness
secretly; do not hold me up to scorn before all, but make me shine with
the light of genuine repentance, O Saviour, and save me.

A prodigal I always couple sins with sins, Master, and I never feel the
fear of you, Lord; and so before the end save me and take pity.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Protected by the shield of true religion and grasping the weapon of the
Cross as a sword, you went to combat with the enemy, glorious Saints,
and hurled him to the ground.

The godly Martyrs had no fear of blood-thirsty lions and cutting swords,
of boiling cauldrons, scraping of nails, beatings and painful tortures.

****

Theotokion.

Let us honour in hymns Mary the Virgin, the immaculate Tabernacle, Ark
and Table, the Mountain from which was hewn without human hand a Stone,
the Lord of all.

****

Another, of the Forerunner, of which the acrostic is:

I weave a prayerful song for you with love, O blessed one. Joseph.

****

The Irmos.

Like a great star running before the Sun, you shed light on the world by
your rays, O Baptist. Therefore I cry to you: Enlighten my heart,
blinded by the dreadful blackness of numberless offences.

When you were born, blessed Saint, you loosed the bonds of barrenness;
and so I beg you, by your prayers, show my soul, fruitlessly barren
through passions, productive of the fair offspring of virtues.

Going before him in the power of Elias, you prepared the way for the
Redeemer; direct the motions of my soul towards the goal, revered
Baptist, removing by your prayers every stone and hindrance of passion.

****

Theotokion.

O Cloud of light, by your radiant mediations scatter the many harmful
clouds of my soul, that I may see the rays of him who dawned from you,
and by light receive as well light that never sets.

****

Ode 3. The Irmos.

Lord, who establish the thunder and create the wind, establish me that I
may sincerely sing your praise and do your will; for none is holy as
you, our God.

****

Troparia.

You gave light to eyes of the blind, give light to my eyes, darkened by
the pleasures and cares of life and which in no way gaze upon your
judgements.

See, it is time; come to your senses, my soul from the wicked deeds that
you have done, and in fear cry out to the Master and Redeemer: Open wide
for me, O Christ, the gates of repentance!

****

Of the Martyrs.

Beliar was seen to be routed by the godly struggles of the Champions,
and, trampled under foot by them, he who boasted before is seen an
ineffectual corpse.

The company of the Saints as martyrs finished the course and with godly
strength they truly cut down ten thousands of spiritual Ethiops and
obtained glory.

****

Theotokion.

You abolished the grief of our first parents, All-holy Mother of God,
when you bore joy, the Life-giver and Redeemer; implore him insistently
that our souls may be saved.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

Every virtue you practised, every sin you hated from the heart, and you
showed mankind, blessed Forerunner, the way of repentance.

You have been revealed as the greatest Forerunner of the Word incarnate;
and so I beg you, deliver me from irrational passions by guiding me to
repentance.

While still dwelling in the body you displayed the life of the Bodiless
Powers, O Forerunner; by your prayers empower us to imitate it we beg.

****

Theotokion.

Through you, Virgin Mother, the world, grown unprofitable by
transgression, has found mercy; therefore with songs of praise it calls
you blessed.

****

Ode 4. The Irmos.

I heard your report, O God, and was afraid; I understood your works,
said the Prophet, and I glorified your power.

****

Troparia.

I have been stripped of virtues and clothed myself in wickedness, and
see, I am filled with shame; Jesu lover of mankind make me radiant with
robes of godlike modesty.

By sailing my course with sloth, O Word, through the sea of the world I
have fallen into the shipwreck of the pleasures of the body; direct me
to the harbour of repentance.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The noble Martyrs truly purged the rottenness of sin with the salt of
godly bravery and they won salvation for all.

Rolling upon the earth like stones the Champions utterly crushed the
strongholds of error. At their intercessions, Lord, save us.

****

Theotokion.

At every time, in every place I call you my salvation, do not despise
me, All-spotless, who bore God, my Redeemer and my Saviour.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

Knowing you to be like the turtle-dove heralding the spring of truth for
the world with words of utter truth, we call you blessed, revered
Forerunner.

As mediator of the Old and New Testaments, by your intercessions, renew
me wholly, who am crushed by the crafts of the deceiver, O Forerunner.

In the desert you dwelt with a blameless life; by your godly
intercessions renew my mind become a desert through every transgression,
O Forerunner.

****

Theotokion.

Your Son has been acknowledged as our pardon and redemption; implore him
to save those who with compunction of soul call you blessed

****

Ode 5. The Irmos.

Make the light of your commands dawn for me, O Lord, for my spirit rises
early for you, O Christ, and sings your praise; for you are my God, and
to you I have fled for refuge, O King of peace.

****

Troparia.

As I with sloth accomplish the course of this perishable life and am
darkened each day by the deceptions of the deceiver, take pity on me,
Jesu, and guide me towards the light of repentance and life.

My heart was exalted by the deceptions of the serpent and I was borne
down in a mighty fall; O Jesu, the righting of the fallen, turn me back,
save me through the multitude of your pity.

****

Of the Martyrs.

With the drops of your blood you quenched the furnace of error with its
many gods, blessed Athletes of the Saviour, and with showers of healings
you ever put a stop to the blaze of passions.

As you stood before the judgement seat, flogged with scourges, your
heads severed, and experiencing a multitude of harsh punishments, you
yet remained unbowed through divine inspiration.

****

Theotokion.

Make the beam of your mercy dawn for me, O Lady, in the darkness of my
faults, O Virgin, and guide me towards the light of repentance, O
Immaculate, that in faith I may hymn you.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

Nursling of the desert with the dew of your intercessions keep me who am
on fire with the coals of the desert, the assaults of the passions,
unscathed by their harm.

The divine right hand of the Father is baptised by your holy right hand
and saves us by your intercessions from every straitening.

The whole world has you, O Forerunner, as refuge and mighty protection
and great wall; deliver us by your intercessions from dread disasters.

****

Theotokion.

God loved you, Virgin Maiden, the beauty of Jacob; God who makes
beautiful through you all those who have been blackened by their former
transgression.

****

Ode 6. The Irmos.

On the sea of life I have descended to the deep by my actions; but like
Jonas from the whale so I cry out to you: Lead me up I beg from the deep
of evils, O Son and Word of God.

****

Troparia.

Wretch that I am I have weighed down my soul with the slumber of
indifference, and have been borne down by the sleep of sin; rouse me
towards the light of repentance, Lord, and in your compassion save me.

How have I trembled, wretch that I am? How have I been estranged from
the good God? How do I not bear in mind that dread assize, at which I am
to be judged? My Maker, take pity on me!

****

Of the Martyrs.

Truly you appeared like a lyre, ever singing a song of salvation, and
delighting the hearts of the faithful, and you completely dispel the
drunkenness of error, glorious Athletes.

Surpassing the limits of the human, Christ’s Martyrs, with their divine
urge towards the Creator, endured rejoicing the trials of tortures as
though in bodies not their own.

****

Theotokion.

All-holy Virgin, protection of all the faithful, be present to deliver
me from threat and darkness of the dread assize at the hour of
judgement, that with faith I may ever hymn you.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

You stood baptising in the streams of Jordan the Master who takes away
the sins of all mankind; do not cease to beseech him, O Forerunner, to
take pity on our souls.

You were revealed as herald of repentance, O Forerunner. In that
repentance keep my soul, ruined by harmful sins and unable to arise.

In untrodden deserts you made the coming approach of the Word resound
for souls, blessed Prophet; therefore with never-silent voices the whole
Church calls you blessed.

****

Theotokion.

The images of the Law made clear your dread child-bearing, Bride of God;
as we now contemplate their fulfilment, Sovereign Lady, we fittingly
glorify you.

****

Ode 7. The Irmos.

The Children of Abraham who did not worship the golden image were tried
as gold in a smelting-furnace; for in the furnace of fire as in a bridal
chamber filled with light they danced and cried: Blessed is the God of
our fathers!

****

Troparia.

In your compassion, O Christ, you appeared as a new-born infant to
redeem the world from the ancient condemnation; and so I cry; I have
become old through many sins, make me new, O Saviour, and save me as I
cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers!

You once saved Manasses when he repented, took pity on the Harlot as she
wept, justified the Thief with a word; accept me too who have committed
many grievous sins, O Saviour, and save me as I cry: Blessed is the God
of our fathers!

****

Of the Martyrs.

When the world was gripped by the shipwreck of polytheism, the
Champions, embarked on the ship of true religion, with Christ as
helmsman, set sail for the harbour of life as they cried: Blessed is the
God of our fathers!

Shining clearly like gold in a furnace the Athletes were tested by many
tortures and displaying honoured imprints of the sufferings of Christ
they have now been laid up as treasures in the storehouses of heaven in
complete incorruption.

****

Theotokion.

All-pure and immaculate Lady, beseech the Saviour, God, Redeemer and
Master whom you bore, that we, having received release from dangers and
forgiveness of many sins may hymn his pities beyond understanding.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

You were revealed as greater than all born of woman, Prophet of God; at
your great intercession deliver me who have greatly sinned from the
great flame that I may call you blessed.

I have appeared as a fruitless fig tree and I quail before the axe;
better me by your mediation and make me fruitful, that I may call you
blessed, O Forerunner of the Saviour.

Put to sleep every harm of the foe, which is roused against those who
have recourse to you in faith, by your unsleeping intercessions, O John,
Forerunner of the Redeemer of all.

****

Theotokion.

Guard from evil seizure, foraging and slavery of the boaster, O Virgin,
your servants who with soul and tongue ever glorify you.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

Cherubim and Seraphim stand round you, Lord, in a fire of flame and all
creation sings you a fair hymn of praise: You people praise, bless,
highly exalt Christ the only Creator to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

I have not dwelt in your fear, I have not listened to your commandments,
I have never done your will; what will become of me, the wretch? You
love mankind, take pity on me, save me, O Saviour, and do not cast me
away.

Husbandman of fair deeds, with the sickle of your fear pluck out by the
roots all the thorny thoughts of my wretched soul, O Christ; and with
the seed of repentance grant that sprout a ear of salvation.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Confined by many tortures the Champions were led into the open by grace
and they confined the ways of the foe, full of pitfalls; and now they
guide us to the ways of God by faith and love.

The trickster was shipwrecked and fell into the deep of your bravery and
struggle, O Martyrs, and the fool lies prostrate, laughed at by all;
while you are ever adorned with crowns of victory.

****

Theotokion.

Your womb, all-blameless, was revealed to the world as heap of grain
bearing the corn of life which nourishes all things; and so we faithful
in harmony sing your praise as cause of all good.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

By your light-filled intercessions rouse me who am overpowered by the
sleep of sloth and darkened by the fog of wickedness and grant that I
may walk nobly, as in a day of virtues.

A storm of temptations buffets me and a tempest of passions tosses me
about; give me your hand, guiding the barque of my soul to the roads of
repentance, by your intercessions.

You baptised him who takes away the faults of the world in the waters of
the river; dry up the abyss of my wickedness with the streams of your
intercessions, blessed Forerunner John.

You saw the holy Spirit, you gave ear to the voice of the Begetter
bearing witness to Jesus as he was ineffably baptised by you, O
Forerunner; implore him that we may be saved.

****

Theotokion.

As source of our refashioning, refashion me, wholly crushed by the
assaults of the serpent, that with faith and love I may call you blest,
all-praised Virgin Mother of God.

****

Ode 9. The Irmos.

He has shown strength with his arm. He has put down the mighty from
their thrones and exalted the humble; the God of Israel, the Dayspring
from on high, has visited us and directed us in the way of peace.

****

Troparia.

See, the mystical bridal chamber has been opened, the wise are trimming
their lamps with the oil of virtues and radiant are entering; cast off
the sleep of sloth, O soul, that you may enter with Christ bearing your
lamp.

Like the Harlot I grasp your feet in spirit and wash them with my tears,
O Word; wash me clean of the filth of the passions, O Saviour, as you
say to me also: Your faith has saved you, that I may hymn your
measureless compassion.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The Martyrs, with heart and soul that leap for joy, dwell in realms
above, having obtained forever the marks of Christ as a fair adornment,
and for us they entreat peace, the removal of dangers and release from
faults.

Godly Athletes, every place which in dangers has obtained your relics
like a second Ark of Israel is made holy; while Heaven rejoices with the
Bodiless Powers for it has obtained your souls, blessed Martyrs.

****

Theotokion.

Lover of goodness, Maiden who bore God the lover of goodness, make my
soul good, I cry, which has been dreadfully harmed by the passions and
the evil devices of the deceiver, that with faith I may sing praise you,
the hope of all.

****

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

My strength and my song is Christ the Lord; implore Him, blest
Forerunner, to strengthen me against the passions and every assault of
the boaster that guided successfully I may hymn you who work God’s will.

Fair turtle-dove and sweet-voiced swallow you have been revealed,
godlike Forerunner, harbinger of Christ the divine spring; beseech him
that I may be delivered from the soul-destroying winter and the tempest
of sin I implore you.

By leaping in your mother’s womb you revealed him who shone from a
Virgin; implore him to slay the leapings of the flesh which slay me and
to fill my heart with joy, that I may hymn you, godlike Forerunner.

Merciless is the judgement, O soul, for those who do not show mercy;
see, take care, put oil in your lamp which can keep you unsleeping; the
Bridegroom is at hand, watch lest you have your purpose quenched.

****

Theotokion.

Lover of goodness, Mother of God who gave birth to God the lover of
goodness, ask him to deliver me from every evil and to ravish my heart
with love of him and hate the pleasures of the flesh, that I may praise
you the All-praised.

****

Aposticha of Lauds, of Compunction.

I am a sheep of your rational flock, and I flee to you, the Good
Shepherd; seek me out who have been led astray, O God, and have mercy on
me.

A tempest of sins surrounds me, Saviour, and unable to bear the storm I
fall down before you the only Pilot; stretch out your hand of love for
mankind to me as to Peter and save me.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Holy Martyrs, by bravely proclaiming Christ in the stadium you have
become companions of the Angels, for you abandoned all pleasures in the
world as unreal and held fast to the faith as a sure anchor; therefore
too having driven out error you are a source of gifts of healings for
the faithful as you intercede without ceasing that our souls may be
saved.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Mother of God, universal Queen, boast of the Orthodox, put to shame the
insolence and faces of heretics, who do not venerate, nor honour, O
All-pure, your revered image.

[at the liturgy]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}
---------------------------------------------------

**[Beatitudes]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}**

Through a tree Adam became an exile from Paradise; but through the Tree
of the Cross the Thief made Paradise his home. For the one through
tasting set aside his MasterÂ’s commandment, while the other, crucified
with him, confessed the hidden God, as he cried: Remember me in your
Kingdom.

O Christ the Word, who accepted PeterÂ’s weeping and the HarlotÂ’s tears
and the Publican when he only sighed, take pity too on me, as you are
compassionate, as I fall down and beg that I be granted pardon of
offences. Supremely loving Lord, ransom me from Hell in the other world
as you are compassionate.

Great Forerunner, who loosed the bonds of sterility, loose the
barrenness of my wretched heart and by your mediation help it on the way
to bear deeds of virtue; through which I shall receive inexhaustible
life, as I cry: Remember me, Saviour, in your Kingdom.

****

Of the Martyrs

Though crushed by torments and given as fodder to wild beasts, fearfully
maimed and cast into the depth of the sea, wasted by fire and flogged by
savage decree, you did not deny God, all-praised Martyrs. Ever implore
him to save our souls.

Glory.

Having purified our minds let us cry out to the Trinity: Father, Son,
Holy Spirit, identical in honour, guard your servants, who worship you
with sincere love, as we cry to the one God: Remember us also in your
Kingdom.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

You received in your womb the One who with the Father is without
beginning and equal in majesty with the holy Spirit and you bore him
beyond understanding and reason when he became man for the welfare of
mankind, Mary Bride of God, spacious place of our God. Beg him
insistently that your servants may be saved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
