\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone4.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat4ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun4nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins and Liturgy](sun4mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins3.md) \] \[ Wednesday Matins \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers3.md) \]

[on Wednesday morning]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}
=========================================================

[at matins]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}
----------------------------------------------

****

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter Kathismata of the Cross.

Tone 4.

By your precious blood you have redeemed us from the curse of the law;
nailed to the Cross and pierced by the lance, you have become a source
of immortality for all. Our Saviour, glory to you.

****

Verse:

** Exalt the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool, for he is
holy. ****

Model Melody

Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, grant your mercies, O Christ
God, to the new commonwealth that bears your name. Make your faithful
people glad by your power, giving them victory over their enemies. May
they have your help in battle: a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion.**

As she stood by the Cross of the Lamb and Redeemer, the all-blameless
Ewe-Lamb was smitten with dread lamentations and looking up she said in
her amazement: What is this new and strange sight? My sweetest Son, how
do you bear all this willingly? How do you endure voluntary crucifixion
and a painful death? O Creator, I glorify your condescension beyond
understanding.

****

After the 2nd Psalter reading other Kathismata.

Model Melody.

Come quickly to help us, Christ our God, before we are enslaved by foes
who blaspheme you and who threaten us; by your Cross destroy those who
make war on us; let them know how strong is the faith of the Orthodox,
at the prayers of the Mother of God, O only lover of mankind.

****

Verse:

God is our king from of old; he has worked salvation in the midst of the
earth. ****

Same melody

The Jews nailed you to a Cross, O Saviour, through which you summoned us
of old from among the nations, Christ our God; on it you stretched out
your hands by your own wish, and in the multitude of your mercies you
deigned that your side be pierced by a lance, O only lover of mankind.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion.\
The same.**

When your Mother without bridegroom saw you lifted up on the Cross, with
bitter grief she cried out thus: What is this new and strange and
marvellous wonder? How has a lawless people nailed to the Cross you, the
only Giver of life, my sweetest light?

****

After the 3rd Reading from the Psalter, others.

Lifted up on the Cross.

When I had fallen terribly in Paradise by the bitter advice of the
slayer of mortals, you raised me up again, O Christ, on Calvary, healing
by a Tree the curse of the tree, slaying the serpent that had put me to
death by deception and granting me divine life. Glory to your
Crucifixion, O Lord!

****

Verse:

** God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

Clothed as in purple and fine linen with the blood of your Martyrs
throughout the world, your Church cries out to you through them, Christ
God: Send down your pity on your people; grant peace to your
commonwealth and to our souls your great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion. Lifted up on the Cross.**

When the Ewe-Lamb and Virgin watched you hanging on the Cross, O Mighty
One, with grief and tears she said: What is your ineffable
condescension, O Word? How has the condemned people now condemned you,
the God who is going to judge all? I hymn your ineffable mercy.

****

Canon of the Cross, of which the acrostic is:

\
The Cross is a weapon for salvation. Joseph. ****

Ode 1. Tone 4. Irmos.

Through the Red Sea’s deep the Israel of old marched dry shod, and by
MosesÂ’ hands, outstretched in the form of a cross, routed the power of
Amalek in the wilderness.

****

Troparia

Jesu, who stretched out the heavens, you stretched out your palms on the
Cross, openly embracing the nations who took their name from you, as you
are loving and compassionate.

With your Cross wall me about, my Christ, lest I become a prey to the
wolf who seeks my destruction, O Word, and who each day prepares for me
words and ambushes.

****

Of the Martyrs

By your pains you threw down the cause of every pain, and now you
inherit a life without pain, as you ever alleviate every pain from our
souls and bodies, blessed Martyrs.

With indissoluble bonds you bound the artful one, wise Martyrs, bound
for the sake of Christ, who was bound by his own will and abolished
every error; therefore we fittingly call you blessed.

****

Cross-Theotokion

After childbirth you remained a Virgin without corruption, O Most Pure,
having borne beyond reason the One who was lifted up on the Cross.
Therefore all we believers with loud acclaim call you blessed.

****

Another Canon, to the most holy Mother of God, of which the acrostic is:

A fourth for the Maiden, Mother of God.

****

The same Irmos

As you are purer than all creation, all-pure Mother of God, by your pure
intercession purify my heart, dreadfully befouled by impure passions.

Rescue me from the tears and groans which await me at the coming fearful
judgement by your acceptable prayers to the Creator and our God, O
immaculate Virgin-Mother.

You alone by your childbearing beyond understanding freed the race of
mortals from the curse; by your entreaties, O All-pure, free one
enslaved to the disorders of the flesh.

****

Ode 3. Irmos

Your Church, O Christ, rejoices in you and cries: You, Lord, are my
strength, my refuge and my firmament.

****

Troparia

Lifted up on the Cross you lifted up those that had been drawn down to
corruption, and you made the enemy fall, O Master, Christ our God.

The swords of the hostile one were blunted when your side was lanced and
Eden opened, O empersonned Word of the Father.

****

Of the Martyrs

The rivers of fire have put an end to the rivers of deception, and the
Martyrs have extinguished the pyre of the worship of many gods.

Crucified and beaten to the ground, Martyrs of Christ, you slew the
hostile dragon with a sword of steadfastness.

****

Cross-Theotokion

When the blameless Ewe Lamb saw you hanged on a Cross, Master, she wept
with grief as she sang the praise of your might.

****

Of the Mother of God. Another Irmos.

I implore you, Sovereign Lady, higher than the Cherubim, prove my mind,
fallen victim to the assaults of the serpent, to be higher than the
passions.

In the dread trial, when the Lord is about to sentence me who have
sinned greatly, may I find you to deliver me from condemnation.

In your pity, O Christ, change my uncompassionate ways by your
compassion; save me who am without compassion at the entreaties of the
One who bore you.

****

Ode 4. Irmos

Seeing you, the Sun of righteousness, raised upon the Cross, the Church
stands in order and fittingly cries out: Glory to your power, O Lord!

****

Troparia

The sun when it saw you raised on a Tree, O Sun of glory, clothed itself
in darkness; rocks were rent and the veil of the temple.

When you were crucified and pierced by a lance the whirling sword
withdrew at your command, Lord, before the grateful Thief, as he sang in
praise of your might.

****

Of the Martyrs

Walled about with the weapon of your Cross, Lord, the Champions
appeared, unwounded by the arrow of wickedness, and they threw down the
unstable walls of the folly of idols.

You were offered as victims, like sweet spice, as oblations and complete
offerings to the Lord, who through compassion made himself poor, and you
received, O Martyrs, the rewards of your toils.

****

Cross-Theotokion

You gave birth to the timeless within time, and alone obtained blameless
virginity. When you saw the Lord hanged on a Tree you rent your soul in
pieces by your pains.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

O Immaculate, you are the divine house of the Sanctification that was
emptied for the well-being of what he himself had fashioned. Sanctify my
soul and guide my thought with light.

By your prayers, Sovereign Lady, strengthen my thought, tossed about by
the tempest of wickedness and wholly sunk in indifference, and snatch it
from it s falls.

I now entreat you, O Virgin, Palace of the King, living Heaven, by your
prayers prove me, who have been named a robbersÂ’ cave, to be a house
for the Trinity.

****

Ode 5. Irmos

You, Lord, my light, came into the world, a holy light turning from the
darkness of ignorance those who sing your praise in faith.

****

Troparia

When your side was pierced, Master, you poured forth divine streams for
me, who had slipped down to corruption at the prompting of my side.

The precious Cross is a trophy of victory against enemies, which you
have given, O Word, for the salvation of us who with faith sing your
praise.

****

Of the Martyrs

Mortals have now been joined to the ministers of fire, for as
resplendent Martyrs they passed through the material fire of the
greatest torments.

You confirmed that though the mortal body of the Martyrs was destroyed
by many sufferings, the disposition of their souls towards the Lord was
indestructible.

****

Cross-Theotokion

The One who alone is good entered an incorrupt womb and was seen
incarnate and crucified that he might redeem us from corruption.

****

Of the Mother of God. Another Irmos.

Ewe-Lamb who birth gave to the Lamb of God, give life to my soul,
poisoned by the bite of the serpent, and wandering, Sovereign Lady, on
the mountains of transgression.

By your fervent intercession devoutly rouse my soul, pierced by the
force of dreadful deeds, to fervent, godly love of the Creator, O Mother
of God all-praised.

Fair and unblemished, pure among women, now free my wretched soul from
the disgrace of passion and guide me to live rightly by your mediation.

****

Ode 6. Irmos

I will sacrifice to you with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church cries
to you, cleansed from the gore of demons by the Blood which flowed
through pity from your side.

****

Troparia

Lover of mankind, far beyond every highest honour, you accepted to be
dishonoured that you might both honour me, most wickedly dishonoured,
and save me by the Cross.

A dead corpse you were as you hung upon the Tree, but you made the one
who brought death a corpse and now filled with shame. My Maker I sing
your power.

****

Of the Martyrs

By wounding you, O Martyrs, with unbearable torments the all-evil one
was wounded and struck down at your feet, and he appears a
laughing-stock to all.

The relics of the Martyrs gush forth healings; dust lying in a tomb
dissolves the demons like dust and cures manifold forms of bodily
disease.

****

Cross-Theotokion

The lawless assembly has transfixed you with nails, and I am now torn in
my heart by the sword of grief, my Maker, cried the Virgin as she wept.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

Your Offspring, O Virgin, as the life and resurrection of all, has
become the destroyer of death. Therefore I beseech you, raise again my
soul that has died.

At the entreaties of your Mother and the numberless Powers, Lover of
mankind, stretch out a hand to help me who am storm-tossed on the ocean
of life.

Land that brought forth the divine ear of wheat, do not despise my soul,
dried up and wasted away by famine of things divine, but nourish me with
your SonÂ’s divine gifts of grace.

****

Ode 7. Irmos

The Children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, fired by love for true
religion rather than by the flame, cried out: Blessed are you, O Lord,
in the temple of your glory.

****

Troparia

You were willingly crucified naked on a Cross, O Immortal who alone
clothe the heavens with clouds, and who clothed with eternal shame the
one that of old stripped our Forebears naked.

You were lifted up on a Cross and fallen Adam was raised; your side was
pierced by a lance, Master, and the cunning one received a blow to the
heart. Blessed is your might, O Lord.

****

Of the Martyrs

All-praised Athletes, most fairly united to the fair Word, bound and
crushed you were wholly parted from the world, and you ever bind the
enemy hand and foot.

The Athletes truly shattered the walls of error by the divine levering
of godlike sufferings, and were revealed as a wall for believers and a
fortress for those who devoutly call them blessed.

****

Cross-Theotokion

When you saw Christ God, who appeared as dew in the furnace and who in
no way burned up your womb, hanged upon a Tree, O Maiden, you glorified
his condescension beyond understanding.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

O Maiden, divine Mountain from which was hewn the Stone that smashed the
monuments of the demons, drive out the false images from my soul and the
stony stubbornness of my heart.

You were not shaken as you received in womb, O Maiden, the One who by
his glance shakes the earth and what is on it when he wishes; therefore
establish me firmly, who am shaken by the assaults of the foe.

Destroy my fleshly thoughts, Mother of God, and make me wholly
spiritual, adorning with virtues me whom the all-evil one has blackened
with the disfigurement of pleasures.

****

Ode 8. Irmos

Stretching out his hands Daniel closed the jaws of the lions in the den;
while the Youths, lovers of true religion, girded with virtue, quenched
the power of the fire as they cried: Bless the Lord, all you works of
the Lord.

****

Troparia

Wishing to heal the sin of a violent hand, Master, you were transfixed
by nails, unfastening every passionate of the First-formed, O Lord, as
he sang: All you his works, praise the Lord.

When your side was pierced the record of Adam, the first-formed, was
torn up; by the drops of your blood, Master, the universe is sanctified,
as it ever sings with voices of thanksgiving: Bless the Lord, all you
works of the Lord.

****

Of the Martyrs

The all-revered Martyrs stood in the midst of the fire, as though
refreshed by dew, not consumed by flames, and in mystic harmony with the
Youths they raised a truly godly song: Bless the Lord, all you works of
the Lord.

Carrying the unsleeping torch of your deliberate choice, O Martyrs, you
were not turned aside by the darkness of punishments, but empowered by
God you upwards to the unsetting light as you cried out: Bless the lord,
all you works of the Lord.

**Cross-Theotokion**

When the all-praised Sovereign lady saw Christ put to death and putting
to death the enemy who put mortals to death, weeping she sang his praise
as Master, and marvelling at his long-suffering she cried aloud: All you
his works, praise the Lord.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

You bore a ripe fruit, from which death ate and was destroyed. And so I
cry to you: Sovereign Lady, give me life, who by the fruit of sin have
been treacherously put to death, as I sing: Bless the Lord, all you
works of the Lord.

By your unceasing intercession, all-pure Lady, put to sleep the
passionate motions of my mind, and raise me up from the sleep of sloth
to sing with an awakened soul: Bless the Lord, all you works of the
Lord.

There, wretched soul, you will have no advocate, when your base conduct
brings forward unnumbered accusations. And so repent, and take as your
fellow worker for the good the only Immaculate; for she alone is the
refuge of mortals.

****

Ode 9. Irmos

A Stone not cut by human hand was cut from you, O Virgin, unhewn
mountain: Christ the head of the corner, who joined together the natures
that were parted; and so with joy, Mother of God, we magnify you.

****

Troparia

See, Life has appeared to all, hanged upon a Tree. But the sun, not
bearing it, cuts off its rays, the earth is shaken and thoughts are
strengthened for true religion and for holiness.

Ah, how does the lawless people condemn you, the lawgiver, to die on a
Tree, O Jesu who are the Life and lord of all things, through suffering
granting dispassion to all mortals.

****

Of the Martyrs

With your mouths that spoke of God you proclaimed the incarnation of the
Word in the midst of lawless foes, all-praised Martyrs, and after
struggling holily you were garlanded with crowns of victory.

Like stars shining by day you light all creation with the radiance of
your holy struggles and the godlike splendours of healings, and you
scatter the deep night of the passions, godly Martyrs.

****

Cross-Theotokion

Enlighten my soul darkened by sin, Pure Virgin; dispel the clouds of my
evils, O Cloud of light, who saw of old the sun being darkened when the
Immortal was crucified.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

Break the bonds of my evils with the divine lance of your Son; loose my
wretched soul, fettered and endangered, and bind it to love, O Virgin
Mother of our God.

O wider than the heavens, lead my heart, straitened by every hostile
assault, to the broad plain of dispassion, empowering me always to
journey by the narrow path.

That I may glorify you, O Virgin who have been truly glorified, deliver
me from the ignobility of sin, and make me, who take refuge in your
mercy, a partaker in heavenly glory.

****

Aposticha of Lauds. Of the Cross.

May your Cross be a wall for us, Jesus our Saviour; for we the faithful
have no other hope but you who were nailed to it and who grant us your
great mercy.

You have given as a sign to us who fear you, Lord, your precious Cross,
through which you triumphed over the principalities and powers of
darkness and brought us back to our ancient blessedness. Therefore we
glorify your loving dispensation, Jesu all-powerful, the Saviour of our
souls.

How should we not marvel at your struggles, holy Martyrs, for clothed in
mortal bodies you wounded bodiless foes? The threats of tyrants did not
fright you, nor the assaults of tortures make you cower. Fittingly
indeed you have been glorified by Christ and you ask for our souls his
great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion**

As your Mother watched you stretched out upon the Cross, pierced by the
nails and wounded in the side by the lance, lamenting she cried: Alas,
my beloved Child, how has the lawless people put you to death, who give
life to those in Hades? But arise quickly, and give joy to those you
have loved.

[at the liturgy]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}
---------------------------------------------------

**[The Beatitudes]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}**

Through a tree Adam became an exile from Paradise; but through the Tree
of the Cross the Thief made Paradise his home. For the one through
tasting set aside his MasterÂ’s commandment, while the other, crucified
with him, confessed the hidden God, as he cried: Remember me in your
Kingdom.

Through your great loving kindness, O Christ, you were nailed to the
Cross; you were pierced in the side and became the source of two springs
of forgiveness, while the earth, unable to bear watching the shameless
deed, heaved and quaked, the rocks were rent, the sun was quenched,
mountains and hills were shaken with fear of your might.

Of old the hand of the Forefather Adam had been stretched out
intemperately to the tree of knowledge. To right his fall, O Christ, you
were stretched out by your own will and you were nailed by your hands, O
Long suffering who fashioned mankind with your hand through your
infinite loving kindness. Glory, O Word, to your compassion beyond
understanding.

****

Of the Martyrs

Making the earth a heaven, Holy Martyrs, by the surpassing splendours of
your contests, through them you dispelled all the darkness of vain folly
and you came to dwell with the unsetting light, made divine by
participation, and you pour the brilliance of the light of knowledge on
all who fittingly call you blessed.

Glory.

Worship, glory and honour let us bring to the Trinity, cause of all,
offering with thrice-holy words the hymn of the Angels. To the Father
without beginning, to the Son and Spirit we sing aloud and cry out the
word of the good Thief: Remember us also in your Kingdom.

Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion**

When you saw your Son and God willingly hanged on a cross, O Most Pure,
you were amazed and weeping you said: How has your beauty set, O Lord,
who made the universe beautiful? Why has an ungrateful people repaid you
like this for your blessings? Glory, O Word, to your supreme loving
kindness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
