\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone5.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat5ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun5nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Morning](sun5mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins4.md) \] \[ Weekday Vespers \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins5.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins PDF](Thursday%20Matins%20PDF.md) \]

WEEKDAY VESPERS

ON SUNDAY EVENING

****

At Lord,

I have cried*,* **Prosomia of the Lord.**

Hail, of ascetics.

Alas for one who has enraged you, my merciful God and Lord! How many
times have I promised to repent, my Christ, and been found out a
senseless liar. Earlier I befouled my baptismal garment, the agreements
I made with you I disregarded; and yet again this second promise, which
I confessed to you before Angels and men, when I put on the habit of
mourning, I have set at naught; but, Saviour, do not at the end let me
be destroyed.

Wretched soul, what defence do you have on the day of judgement? Or who
will rescue you from the sentence of eternal fire and all the torments?
No one can make the Compassionate have mercy, except you yourself by
abandoning your unlawful acts, by obtaining a way of life pleasing to
God, by weeping each day over your numberless falls, by which you
stumble hour by hour in deed and word and thought, by asking Christ to
grant you for all these complete pardon.

O Saviour, do not let the compelling habit of sin master me; do not let
the demon, who makes constant war on me, lord it over me and bring me
down to his will; but snatch me from his mastery, and reigning in me,
Lover of humankind, count me worthy to become wholly yours and to live,
O Word, according to your will, to take my rest in you, and to find
pardon and salvation and your great mercy.

****

Other Stichera. Of the Bodiless Powers. Same melody.

The corruption of the passions tyrannises over me and clouds the pupils
of my heart, and I have no strength at all to see the ways of salvation.
As I advance I go astray, Archangels, and I am hurled headlong into the
deep pits of Hell. But when I call to mind your wonders, I am cured of
all my sickness. Oh that now I could quickly see your kindness! Hasten
to quench the flame of my passions, all-honoured ones, guiding me to the
light of salvation, and giving me release from my evils.

The Evil One, who at first shone with you as the Morning Star, had the
same degree of glory as you, Chief Captains. But out of evil the
opponent was borne down to earth and became murky in darkness, and he
was eager to dash me down with him, I who had been honoured with the
image of the Maker. Nevertheless, though I fell headlong, Christ raised
me up. Appear then for me in my wretchedness as defenders and providers
and wise protectors, asking also for his great mercy.

I should have become in accordance with GodÂ’s image and been numbered
with you, and not, alas, bowed down entirely to the evil foe; but by the
advice of the boaster I did not rival you, I spurned the commandment and
fell from the honour of the Maker, O Archangels, and I am dragged down
by slavery. Nevertheless, seeing me wholly yielded to the passions, give
me your hand to the path which bears me upwards, as you beg that I may
find salvation and the ancient glory of my beauty.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. Same melody.**

Make your illumination shine for me, who am in the darkness of dread
things, O Virgin Mother, who conceived the light of truth and gave birth
to God in the flesh; bring up speedily from the deep of despair, and
establish on the rock of a sure way of life the steps of my soul;
condemn the demons who ceaselessly make war on me; quickly end the pain
of my miserable heart, O hope of the ends of the earth, who grant the
world great mercy.

****

Aposticha of Compunction.

Lord, I do not cease from sinning; I do not know how to be found worthy
of your love for humankind. You, who alone are good, conquer the
stubbornness of my heart and have mercy on me.

****

Verse 1.

To you I lift up my eyes, to you who are enthroned in the heavens. As
the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master: or as the eyes of
a maid toward the hand of her mistress, so our eyes look to the Lord our
God: until he show us his mercy.

Lord, I tremble with fear of you, and I do not cease to do evil. Who
does not tremble at the judge in the courtroom? Or who, when they want
to be cured, enrages the physician as I do? Long-suffering lord, have
compassion on my weakness and have mercy on me.

****

Verse 2.

Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we have our fill of
derision; our soul has its fill. Mockery for those at ease: and derision
for the proud. ****

Of the Martyrs.

Despising all the things of earth and bravely facing torments, you did
not fail in your blessed hopes, but have become heirs to the Kingdom of
heaven, all-praised Martyrs. As you have freedom to speak before the God
who loves humankind, ask peace for the world, and for our souls his
great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Fearful, marvellous and great the mystery! The Uncontainable was
contained in a womb, and the Mother after child-birth remained still a
virgin; for she gave birth to God, incarnate from her. To him let us
cry, to him let us speak our praise, as with the Angels we sing out:
Â‘Holy are you, Christ God, who became man for our sake; glory to you!Â’

ON MONDAY EVENING

****

At

Lord, I have cried, **prosomia of the Lord.**

Hail, of ascetics.

Abolish the hardness of my heart, O Saviour, that has come to me from
the demons, and give me showers of tears of repentance, that I may
lament my many grave offences, be delivered from the filth of my
thoughts, rescued from the forgetfulness of darkness and be raised to
the knowledge of good things. Attend to me and hear me, be merciful,
Lord, and banish from my wretched soul the passions that tyrannise over
it, that I may find pardon in you and do what you will.

The lips I move to you, O Lord supremely good, are fouled, hands filthy,
heart heaped high with evil thoughts. With blinded eyes I carry round,
poor wretch, a soul made dark by the passions; utterly profane I am
smothered by unseemly pleasures and have no upward inclination. Stretch
out your hands, O Lover of mankind. Save me, O Saviour, I cry out to you
and cleanse me from the filth of many offences and from dread things
that come upon me, for you are full of compassion.

Cool the muddy streams, good Jesu, hold back the torrents and grant my
heart showers of many tears in compunction of soul. Like the Prodigal I
have gone far from you and been stripped naked of every favour of your
goodness, most merciful Lord. I have sinned, do not despise me, do not
let the boastful and most wicked enemy take me as being wholly his
subject, but, Master, speedily rescue me from his tyranny.

****

Others, of the Forerunner. Same melody.

A violent and most dreadful storm of the tempest of the passions of my
heart has been poured out and overflows and forces me into a gloomy deep
of harmful despair. With your invisible oversight appear and with the
strength of your revered compassion dry it up and make it finally
disappear, granting me copious streams, honoured Saint, to water my mind
and intellect and all my understanding. Through which, O Forerunner,
grant that pardon and salvation blossom for me.

I have entrusted my whole heart and mind to you, wise Forerunner. Become
for me fervent protector and hope of salvation, helper and guard,
rampart, safest guardian, best pilot, harbour and wall, delivering me
from dangers, snatching me from terrible foes. For you have invincible
intercession and power. You have immeasurable compassion and sympathy,
All-blessed, through which protect, guard and defend me, granting me
GodÂ’s great mercy.

Grant that I may enjoy your resplendent and radiant beauty, when,
through my tears and repentance, I have cleansed all the filth of my way
of living that is subject to the passions. For you know the love of my
soul, its godly longing and measureless affection, which I have acquired
in magnifying you, O Forerunner. Fulfil my desire, though my request is
great, though it far exceeds the measure of my wretched deserving, and
intercede with Christ who grants the world his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. Same melody.**

Stem the rivers of the passions, dry up the ocean of my sin with the
stream of your intercession and bring me to anchor in the harbour of
GodÂ’s divine wishes. Drown in deeps of destruction the enemies that
afflict my soul every day and trouble it with unseemly pleasures. Fill
my heart with joy and gladness, dispel the cloud of despair, O All-pure,
as you implore Christ who grants the world his great mercy.

****

Aposticha of Compunction.

Lord, I do not cease from sinning; I do not know how to be found worthy
of your love for mankind. O alone Good, conquer the stubbornness of my
heart and have mercy on me.

Lord, I tremble with fear of you, and I do not cease to do evil. Who
does not tremble at the judge in the courtroom? Or who, when they want
to be cured, enrages the physician as I do? Long-suffering lord, have
compassion on my weakness and have mercy on me.

****

Of the Martyrs. Model melody.

Wearing the shield of faith and having roused themselves with the sign
of the Cross, your Saints, Lord, bravely submitted to tortures and
destroyed the error and arrogance of the devil. At their intercessions,
as all-powerful God, send down peace to the world and to our souls your
great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Virgin Mother of God, we call you blessed, and we, the faithful, as is
fitting give you glory, the unshakeable city, the unbreachable wall, the
unbreakable defence and refuge of our souls.

ON TUESDAY EVENING

****

At

** Lord, I have cried, **prosomia of the Lord.**

Hail, of ascetics.

Stop the assaults of the demons, which are launched against me, O Lover
of mankind, as they seek to put my lowly soul to death and to bring me
down to destruction; bring their plans and plots each day by night and
day to nothing and rescue me from them, Master; stop the raging tempest
of life, deliver me from Gehenna and eternal darkness, I beg, O Christ,
when you come with glory to judge the world as supremely good.

When the books are opened on the day of your fearful coming, O Christ,
and all are standing at the judgement seat and awaiting the sentence, as
the fire flows before the tribunal and the trumpet loudly sounds, what
shall I do, a wretch examined by my conscience and condemned to the
unquenchable fire? I beg, therefore, to find release from my faults
before the end, Christ my God, who grant the world your great mercy.

You took your Cross on your shoulders, O Christ, as you went to your
passion, and granted an example to us who wish to live in you, how we
might be glorified with you and live; grant that we may also become
partakers of your sufferings and of your glory, bearing your death
around with themselves; slay the stirrings of my flesh, O Lover of
mankind, and nail down its limbs from your divine fear, making me dead
to the world and alive only to your commandments.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same melody.

I weep bitterly and look downcast as I consider the fearful reckoning of
accounts, for from my works I have not gained the beginnings of a small
defence, wretch that I am. Therefore, before the hidden end of life
overtakes me, before the sickle, before death, before judgement, before
I am to embark on the paths to the unquenchable fire and the exterior
darkness, where that worm is found that devours those who offend, I
implore you, pure Lady, give me release from faults and great mercy.

As higher than all creatures you have truly become the cherubim Throne,
for in you the divine Word dwelt willingly to refashion our form, and he
came forth from you bearing flesh, as he is compassionate he accepted
cross and passion for our sake, and as God granted Resurrection.
Therefore as it transformed our condemned nature to the Creator, with
thanksgiving we cry to you, Â‘By your prayers grant us pardon of faults
and GodÂ’s mercyÂ’.

Â‘The streams of weeping from my eyes, my Son so dearly loved, time will
never have the strength to dry up whollyÂ’ cried the Pure Virgin in her
grief, Â‘for you are the light that never sets, who enlighten by giving
light, through whom the great lights of heaven were fixed in place and
the universe was given being. What does it mean to me to see the sun now
my light has set? My sweet light, the enlightenment of my face, how have
you been put out? But I will wipe the pupils of your eyes with the
streams of my tearsÂ’.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion. Same melody.**

When the Ewe-lamb saw her Lamb hastening to the slaughter, she followed
eagerly, crying out to him, Â‘Where are you going, my sweetest child?
For whose sake, my Christ, beloved Jesu, sinless and most merciful Lord,
are you tirelessly running this course? Give a word to your servant, my
Son so dearly loved, do not in silence disregard me, who awesomely gave
you birth, compassionate God, Giver of life, who grant the world your
great mercyÂ’.

****

Aposticha of the Cross.

Your Cross, O Christ, though in essence it appears as wood, is wrapped
round with divine power, and though visible perceptibly to the world,
spiritually it works the wonder of our salvation. As we worship it we
glorify you, O Saviour. Have mercy on us.

No sooner had the tree of your Cross been fixed, O Christ, than error
took to flight and grace flowered; for it was revealed not as punishment
of condemnation but as a trophy of salvation for us. The Cross is our
strength, the Cross our boast, the Cross our joy.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Intercede for us, holy Martyrs, that we may be delivered from our
iniquities; for you have been given grace to intercede for us.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion.**

Standing by your Cross, O Jesu, she who bore you, lamented grieving and
crying out: I cannot bear, my Child, to see nailed upon a tree the one I
bore; for I escaped the pains of childbirth, as one who had not known
man, and how am I now at last seized by pain and blameless torn in
heart? At last the word which Symeon spoke has been fulfilled, that a
sword would pierce my heart; but now my Son, arise and save those who
sing your praise.

ON WEDNESDAY EVENING

****

At

** Lord, I have cried*,* **Prosomia of the Apostles.**

Tone 6. Hail of Ascetics.

Sent out as sharpened arrows of the Master into the whole world, truly
blessed Apostles, with swiftest speed, you blunted all the terrible
fiery darts of the demons, sweeping away the worship of many gods,
teaching all people true religion, enrolling them as sheep of Christ our
God, the true Chief Shepherd. He sent you into the midst of wolves to
tame their wildness through the faith.

You were made disciples of the Word of God, who lived with mortals, one
with them in substance, through his great love for humankind, and truly
took their nature and made it divine. Therefore, all-wise, glorious
Apostles, you followed him with godly steps and imitated his poverty,
considering all things to be rubbish. And so you threw away your second
tunic, taking no staff or purse on the road, and now you have been found
worthy to inherit treasures in heaven.

By your entreaties to the Lord, All-blessed Apostles, rescue us all from
the swell of temptations, the dread sophistry of impious heresies, the
bitter ill counsel of demons and humans, the twisting and storming of
the fire with no light, the worm that lives for ever, the gnashing of
teeth and every other punishment. Implore him that through self-mastery
and the toils we may obtain the rewards of virtue and gain the
inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven and GodÂ’s great mercy.

****

Other Stichera, of St Nicolas.

Hail, sacred head, the pure dwelling of the virtues, godlike rule of the
godly priesthood, manifest great shepherd; torch of victory that bears
its name, in compassion moved to pity for those who pray, bending to the
entreaties of the sick, ready deliverer, saving guardian to all who with
faith honour your most revered memory, implore Christ that our souls
maybe given his great mercy.

Hail, most sacred mind, the pure habitation of the Trinity, pillar of
the Church, support of the faithful, help of the wearied, star that ever
scatters with the radiance of acceptable prayers the darkness of
temptations and afflictions, High Priest Nicolas; calm anchorage where
those surrounded by the billows of life take refuge and are saved,
implore Christ that our souls maybe given his great mercy.

Hail, Nicolas, filled with divine zeal, who, with awesome protection and
visitations through dreams, rescued from an evil fate those about to die
unjustly; source richly springing up with fragrant myrrh for Myra,
watering souls and driving away the foul stench of the passions; sword
that cuts out the weeds of error, flail that winnows the chaff of the
teachings of Arius, implore Christ that our souls maybe given his great
mercy.

Glory Both now.

**Theotokion. Same melody.**

Beset by a multitude of sins, hardened and darkened in mind, I cry to
you with compunction and contrition of thoughts, Â‘Bring light to the
eyes of my soul, O Immaculate, for you bore the Light that knows no
evening and illumines the ends of the earth with the fires of his
knowledge. Enlighten my mind, O All-blameless, with the radiance of your
intercession, making me worthy to become a child of light, as you
implore Christ to grant the world his great mercy.

****

Aposticha of the Apostles.

Disciples of the Saviour, when you had become eye-witnesses of mysteries
you proclaimed the One with is not seen and who has no beginning,
saying: In the beginning was the Word. You were not created before the
Angels, you did not learn from men, but from the wisdom from on high.
And so as you have boldness, intercede on behalf of our souls.

Let us praise harmoniously in songs the Apostles of the Lord; for
clothed with the panoply of the Cross they destroyed the error of idols
and were declared crowned victors; at their intercessions, O God, have
mercy on us.

****

Of the Martyrs.

With insatiable force of soul, holy Martyrs, you did not deny but
endured the dread and diverse tortures of sufferings; you cast to the
ground the arrogance of tyrants; having kept the faith unwavering and
unharmed, you passed over to heaven; therefore as you have also won
boldness, ask that we may be given his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Hail full of grace, Mother of Christ God, for the King of glory appeared
to you and the all-holy Spirit overshadowed you; as you have boldness
intercede that our souls may be saved.

[on Thursday evening]{style="text-transform: uppercase"}

****

At,

Lord, I have cried, **Prosomia of the Cross.**

Hail of ascetics.**

Lord supremely good, my Saviour, wishing to put an end to the toils and
shames of mortals, you endure crucifixion. You tasted shameful slaughter
and gall in your forbearance, taking away all our bitterness. You were
pierced in your immaculate side by a lance, as Master healing our
wounds. Therefore we now sing the praise of your glorious crucifixion,
and bowing down we honour the lance, sponge and reed, through which you
granted your world your peace and great mercy.

Foreshadowing your passion, O Christ, Moses, your great servant, lifted
up the serpent of bronze, rescuing mortals from the harm of the
poisonous bite of serpents, and now when you were crucified, O
Long-suffering, you redeemed the world from the harm of the serpent and
raised it up from earth to things of heaven. Therefore rejoicing we sing
the praise of your might, Lover of mankind, and we honour and bow down
to your Cross, through which all creation has found worth without toil
and your great mercy.

Wishing to unfasten the condition of Adam, the first-formed, in the end
every pain, O sinless Christ, Lover of mankind, AdamÂ’s Fashioner, you
were pierced with nails; and wounded in your divine side by the lance
for our sake, you prevent the flaming sword from barring the entrance to
us, your servants. Therefore as we glorify you, we sing the praise of
your might, Lover of mankind, and we honour and bow down to your Cross,
through which all creation has found worth without toil and your great
mercy.

****

Others, of the Mother of God.

Having the yoke of my soul burdened with a multitude of sins and dread
disasters, Sovereign Lady, I dare not raise my eyes on high, and so,
bowed low to earth, I cry to you, Â‘Have mercy on me, who made God, the
greatly compassionate, dawn from your womb, show me the limitless
multitude of your wonders and stretching out your immaculate and godly
hands to your Son, grant me salvation, O Virgin, by your intercessions.

A fierce storm of sins has seized my on the ocean of life, and a tempest
and billow of despair pushes my heart down to the deep. Pure Maiden, by
your prayers pilot my life to the calm harbour of life, to repentance,
to perfect correction. See my weakness, attend to my judgement, give me
hand of help as I lie sick, All-praised Virgin, who gave birth to
Christ, who grants the world his great mercy.

Having amassed the matter of grievous sins, I have treasured them up for
myself and I tremble before the face of your Son. How shall I endure the
tribunal then? For river of fire draws me before the judgement seat and
tens of thousands of Angels stand around it, casting away those who have
done wrong. Therefore, before my departure from life, All-Immaculate, I
implore you to intercede for me to the Judge who loves mankind to have
mercy and grant me pardon and great mercy.

Glory. Both now. **

**Cross-Theotokion. Same melody.**

Taking up my whole form, the Fashioner and God clothed himself, wishing
to give form to AdamÂ’s fallen form of old. He was lifted up on a Cross,
as though guilty, and, willingly nailed by his hands, he heals the hands
weakened of old by the tree from which they ate. When the All-pure saw
him she cried with loud lament, Â‘What is this great, long-suffering
beyond imagination, my Son? I cannot bear to see you raised on a cross,
my Christ, who hold the whole universe in the hollow of your handÂ’.

****

Aposticha of the Cross.

Lord, once under Moses only the type of your Cross was revealed, yet it
conquered your foes, but now, as we grasp your Cross itself, we ask for
help. Give strength to your Church and grant to our Rulers, as to
Constantine, the trophy of victory through the multitude of your mercy,
Lover of mankind.

Your Cross, Lord, though it appears by nature to be wood, yet it is
clothed with divine power, and while appearing physically to the world,
spiritually it works the wonder of our salvation. As we worship it, we
glorify you, Saviour. Have mercy on us.

****

Of the Martyrs

Having despised all earthly things and bravely faced up to torments, you
were not disappointed of blessed hopes, but you have become heirs of the
Kingdom of heaven, all-praised Martyrs. As you have freedom of access to
the God who loves mankind, now ask peace for the world and for our souls
his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Cross-Theotokion.**

When I see your side pierced by a lance, my Son, I am wounded by the
fearful sword of grief, and I have been wholly unable to abandon the
lament from my soul, said the All-pure, as I stand in the presence of
your suffering and watch your unjust slaughter, O supremely good,
long-suffering Lord. Where for me are the good news, I cry amid my
tears? Where is the one whose greeting to me was Â‘Rejoice!Â’ Where the
ineffable child-bearing? Where is your friend Peter? But glory to your
ineffable long-suffering.

ON FRIDAY EVENING

****

At,

Lord, I have cried, **Prosomia to the Master.**

Hail, of Ascetics.

Spare your servant, O Christ, when my soul is about to be parted from
the body at your command, who brought into one dust and spirit by divine
decree. When invisible enemies assail me with their assault and
wickedness to tear me fiercely asunder and make me their fodder, deliver
me count me worthy to find refreshment where sorrow and groaning have
fled, where there is the torrent of delight, the sound of those who
feast and rejoicing.

Fearful of the final hour and the dread assault of the demons, from a
soul in agony, wretch that I am, I cry to you, Â‘Smash their snares and
stumbling blocks, Lord and Master, and do not me, your servant, be a
victim of their perversity. See my dejection, attend to my affliction
and free my wretched soul from griefs, all-compassionate God, who great
the world great mercyÂ’.

Like the woman of Canaan, Saviour, I too cry out to you, Â‘Cure my soul
and deliver it from the harm of demons and the assault of enemies who
ever trouble me unnaturally, destroy that which is according to your
image, Lord, and draw the judgement of my thought to senseless and
blameworthy desires. Wipe them from my heart, I pray, and plant in it
your purest fear and grant that I may end my life in peace in humility
of soul.

****

Others, of the Martyrs. Model Melodies.

Wearing the shield of faith and having roused themselves with the sign
of the Cross, your Saints, Lord, bravely submitted to tortures and
destroyed the error and arrogance of the devil. At their intercessions,
as all-powerful God, send down peace to the world and to our souls your
great mercy.

Intercede for us, holy Martyrs, that we may be delivered from our
iniquities; for you have been given grace to intercede for us.

With insatiable force of soul, holy Martyrs, you did not deny but
endured the dread and diverse tortures of sufferings; you cast to the
ground the arrogance of tyrants; having kept the faith unwavering and
unharmed, you passed over to heaven; therefore as you have also won
boldness, ask that we may be given his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

In the Red Sea was once depicted an image of the Bride who knew not
wedlock. There Moses was the parter of the water, here Gabriel the
servant of the marvel; then Israel marched dry shod through the deep,
but now the Virgin has given birth to Christ without seed; the sea after
Israel’s passage remained untrodden; the Blameless one after bearing
Emmanuel remained incorrupt. O God, who exists and pre-exists, and
appeared as man, have mercy on us.

****

Aposticha of the Martyrs.

Despising everything on earth and boldly and bravely enduring torments,
you were not disappointed of your hopes, but have become heirs to the
Kingdom of heaven, all-praised Martyrs. As you have confidence towards
the God who loves mankind, ask peace for the world, and for our souls
his great mercy.

****

Verse:

Blessed are those whom you have chosen and taken, O Lord.

I remember the Prophet crying: I am earth and ash; and again I looked
into the graves and saw naked bones, and I said: Which then is King or
soldier, rich or poor, just or sinner? But give rest, Lord, with the
Just to your servants, as you love mankind.

****

Verse:

Their souls will dwell among good things.

You fashioned me, Lord, and laid your hand upon me, and commanded me and
said: You will go back again to earth. Guide me into your straight way,
pardon my offences and forgive me, I beg, as you love mankind.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We beg you, Blessed One, as Mother of God, intercede that we may be
saved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
