\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \] \[ Weekday Vespers \]

**[WEEKDAY VESPERS\
FROM THE 
OCTOICHOS]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; font-weight: normal; mso-bidi-font-weight: bold"}**

INTRODUCTION
------------

A number of Orthodox Christians like to make daily Vespers their evening
prayer and so we hope provide over the next few weeks the texts for
Vespers for weekdays in the eight tones from the Octoichos.

On weekdays there are always six stichera at Â‘Lord, I have criedÂ’, of
which three are normally taken from the Octoichos and three from the
Menaion. In some monasteries two are taken from the first set in the
Octoichos and one from the second. If the Menaia are not to hand, the
General Menaion may be used, or, if one prefers, all six from the
Octoichos, which was probably the older use. If the Saints of the day
have their own doxastikon, then the strict Typikon orders all six
stichera to be from the Menaion, with the stichera doubled.

On Friday evening the first Theotokion is always that used on the
preceding Saturday evening, regardless of the tone of the doxastikon, if
there is one.

The Psalm verses for the Aposticha can be found on Sunday, except for
those for Friday, which are special.

The phrase which ends many troparia in Greek, literally Â‘the great
mercyÂ‘, I translate by Â‘his/your great mercyÂ‘, because it echoes the
opening of Psalm 50, which in Greek literally means Â‘the great mercy of
youÂ‘; in English, Â‘your great mercyÂ‘.

TONE 1
------

In Tone 1 all the stichera for Â‘Lord , I have criedÂ’ use one of two
melodies, Â‘All-praised MartyrsÂ’ and Â‘Joy of the heavenly hostsÂ’. The
Â‘AutomelaÂ’, or Â‘modelÂ’ troparia, can be found at the Aposticha; the
former on both Wednesday and Friday and the latter on Sunday.  That on
Friday occurs, somewhat curiously, among a set of Idiomela. None of the
translations of these texts is metrical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 [TONE 1]{style="color:red"}
============================

[ON SUNDAY EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-weight:normal;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}

[AT VESPERS]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-weight:normal;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"} {#at-vespers align="center"}
==================================================================================

[At]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} Lord, I have cried,
[Stichera of ComÂ­punction, to the
Lord.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Tone 1. All-praised
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

Through goodness you brought all things into being, Lord, by your Word
and Spirit[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}; then you
made me, a rational animal[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2}, that I
might glorify your holy name, O All-powerful; but instead I ever
dishonour it by my shameful deeds: but spare me I beg.

[Learn, my wretched soul, of GodÂ’s kindness and the incorruptible
fatherland, and ever hasten to obtain it by good works. Fix to yourself
nothing of things which perish; your destiny is on high, while the body
is earth and decays; may what is worse not defeat the
better.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Come, my most miserable soul, with fervent tears approach the One who
is supremely good; before your judgement confess all that you have done;
make the Creator have pity on you, poor wretch, and ask pardon, before
the Lord shuts the door against you[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3}.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Others, of the Bodiless Powers. Same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Bodiless Angels, who stand before the throne of God and blaze with the
rays that shine from there, who gleam eternally with light outpoured,
and are named the second lights, intercede with Christ that peace be
given to our souls and his great mercy.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Immortal Angels of God, all-blessed ones, who from the first life have
truly received life that cannot be destroyed, and, as revered beholders
of eternal glory, have become filled with the light of eternal wisdom
and revealed as torches in close serried
ranks.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Archangels, Angels, Principalities, Thrones, Dominions, six-winged
Seraphim and many-eyed CheruÂ­bim, the godlike instruÂ­ments of wisdom,
Powers and most godly Rulers[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}, intercede
with Christ that peace be given to our souls and his great
mercy.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now.]{style="font-style:normal"} [Theotokion. Same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Mary, the unblemished chariot[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5} of purity
that surpasses every mind, direct me, who am held fast and hemmed in by
many sins, to the broad plain of repentance by your all-powerful
protection, for, as Mother of the One who is strong in every way, you
can do this.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Aposticha of
Compunction.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Because I have sunk in the deep ocean of my transgressions, Saviour,
and have been dreadfully overwhelmed by my offences, give me your hand,
O God, as to Peter, and save me[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6}.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[Verse 1.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} ** I have
lifted my eyes, to [you]{style="mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} who dwell in
heaven. Behold as the eyes of servants look to their lordsÂ’ hands; as
the eyes of a maid to her mistressÂ’s hands, so do our eyes to the Lord
our God, until you take pity on us.

[Because I have been condemned, O Saviour,[ 
]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}by my evil thoughts and deeds, grant me the
idea of turning back, O God, that I may cry, Â‘Save me, good Benefactor,
and have mercy on meÂ’.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Verse 2. ]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}Have mercy on
us, Lord, have mercy on us, for we have had our fill of contempt, our
soul has been filled to overflowing. Let reproach be for the prosperous,
and contempt for the proud.

[Of the
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[At the intercession, Lord, of all the Saints and of the Mother of God,
give us your peace and have mercy on us, as you alone are full of
pity.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now. [Theotokion. Model melody.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-style:normal"}

Joy of the heavenly hosts, mighty defence of humans upon earth,
immaculate Virgin, save us who have recourse to you, for, after God, we
have placed all our hope in you.

#### [ON MONDAY EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-weight:normal;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#on-monday-evening align="center"}

##### [AT VESPERS]{style="font-weight:normal;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#at-vespers-1 align="center"}

[At [Lord, I have cried [we insert Prosomia of Compunction to the
Lord.]{style="color: red; mso-bidi-font-style: italic; letter-spacing: -.1pt"}]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}]{style="letter-spacing: -.1pt"}

[Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly
hosts.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Wholly drowned in a sea of sins and held fast in an abyss of offences,
I cry to you, Master supremely good, Â‘Ransom me from troubles and from
trials of many different kinds, and from the unquenchable
fireÂ’.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Sunk deep in despair and full of hostile thoughts, in my wretchedness I
have put all my hopes in you, O Word of God: ransom me from invisible
and visible foes.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[You took pity, O Creator, on every creature through your love for
humankind, and your ineffable poverty, O Word of God, who take away the
sin of the world[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7} as you as
compassionate. Take away my burden also and lighten my most heavy
yoke[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8}.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Others of the Forerunner. All-praised
martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Wondrous Prophet, Baptist and Forerunner of Christ, through your
prayers make my heart, which is dried up through offences, flow with
ever-flowing rivers of tears I beg you, so that I, who am much-pained,
may be saved and magnify him who magnified
you.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Blest Prophet, I place all my hopes and the life of my expectation in
you. You baptized Christ Jesus, the abyss, who takes away the offences
of the world; implore him, John, I beg you, to cleanse my heart and save
me.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Herald of the grace of Christ, godly Forerunner, who proclaimed
repentance [[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9}beforehand to
all the nations, guide my wretched and fevered soul to cleave to
repentance and ever to do the wishes of the Lord, that with faith and
love I may glorify you.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now]{style="font-style:normal"}. [Theotokion. Same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Pure Virgin, you alone were declared the dwelling of the Light which
shone out from the Father[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10}; therefore I cry to you: Make bright my
soul, darkened by the passions, with the light of the virtues, and make
her dwell in tents of light on the day of judgement, O
Immaculate.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Aposticha of
compunction.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Because the sea of my faults is great, O Saviour, and I have been
drowned deep by my offences, give me your hand as once you did to Peter,
save me, O God, and have mercy on me.]{style="letter-spacing:
0pt"}

Because I have been condemned by evil ideas and deeds, O Saviour, grant
me the thought of returning, O God, that I may cry, Â‘Good Benefactor,
save me, and have mercy on meÂ’.

[Of the
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Your confession in the stadium, O Saints, routed the power of the
demons and freed humankind from error. And so, as your heads were cut
off, you cried, Â‘May the sacrifice of our lives be acceptable to you, O
Lord, because longing for you we despised this temporary life, O Lover
of humankindÂ’.]{style="letter-spacing:
0pt"}

[Glory. Both now.[ Theotokion.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}]{style="font-style:normal"}

[Accepting the supplications of sinners and not despising the groaning
of the afflicted, intercede with the One who came from your pure womb,
All-holy Virgin, that we may be
saved.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;letter-spacing:0pt"}[]{style="letter-spacing:0pt"}

[ON TUESDAY EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-weight:normal;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#on-tuesday-evening align="center"}
==========================================================================================

### [AT VESPERS]{style="font-weight:normal;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#at-vespers-2 align="center"}

[At]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} [Lord, I have
cried]{style="font-style:normal"} [we insert Prosomia of the
Cross.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:
italic"}

[Tone 1. All-praised
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

You stretched out your immaculate palms on a Tree, O Christ, and covered
your fingers with blood, for you wished, O Lover of humankind, to redeem
the work of your hands: Adam who by his transgression was held fast by
the kingdom of death and whom you raised by your all-mighty power.

By being nailed to the Cross as man, Christ our God, you made human
nature divine; by slaying the serpent you freed us from the curse which
came from the tree[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11}, as you
are compassionate becoming a curse[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn12){#_ftnref12} yourself
and granting the world blessing and your great mercy.

All honour being your due in that other world, compassionate Master, you
were well-pleased to be dishonoured, undergoing the shameful death on
the Tree, through which the human race plucked immortality and regained
its former life, when you died in the flesh, O All-powerful.

[Of the Mother of God, to the same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

From agonising pain in the feet, paralysis of knees, fracture of limbs
and joints, weakness of hands and feet, rescue me, O All Pure, and from
the harm that comes from different fluxes, keeping me undefiled by all
of these by the love of my God and Fashioner.

Wretch that I am, I bowed down beneath dreadful passions, and I have
done wholly profligate deeds of shame, whose base images and fantasies
even now batter, confuse and turn me to sensual enjoyment of them in the
sensations of my heart. But do you, O Pure one, save me.

My life has become full of many temptations, O All-pure, from the many
evils with which I have offended; but ransom me from both and give me
both a mind and a life that are without offence and a sober reason, that
in faith I may call you blessed and glorify your godly name.

Glory. Both now. [Theotokion. Same melody.]{style="color:red"}

The Virgin, when she saw your unjust slaughter, O Christ, cried out to
you in bitter grief, Â‘My sweetest Child, how are you suffering
unjustly? How hanging on the Tree, you that hung the whole earth on the
waters? Do not, compassionate Benefactor, leave me alone, your Mother
and your servant.

[Aposticha of the
Cross.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

A Cross was fixed on Calvary and flowered with immortality for us from
an inexhaustible spring, the SaviourÂ’s side.

The SaviourÂ’s precious Cross is for us an unbreachable wall; for by
trusting in it we are all saved.

[Of the
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

O the excellence of your deeds, O Saints! For you shed your blood, and
inherited heaven; you were tried for a time, and rejoice eternally.
Truly excellent your exchange, for you abandoned things corruptible and
received things incorruptible, and dancing with the Angels you
ceaselessly hymn the consubstantial Trinity.

[Glory. Both now.[ Cross-Theotokion.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-style:normal"}

Â‘A sword has passed through my heartÂ’ said the Virgin, as she saw
Christ hanging on the tree, Â‘and it rends me, as Symeon foretold to me
of old[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn13){#_ftnref13}. But
arise, O Immortal, and glorify your Mother and handmaid with yourself, I
prayÂ’.

[ON WEDNESDAY EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-weight:normal;
mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#on-wednesday-evening align="center"}
============================================================================================

### [AT VESPERS]{style="font-weight:normal;mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"} {#at-vespers-3 align="center"}

[At ]{style="color:red;
letter-spacing:-.1pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[Lord, I have cried [we
sing prosomia of the Holy Apostles.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Tone 1. All-praised
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Glorious Apostles of Christ, disciples called by God, teachers of the
whole world, having found the Lord, the Mediator between God and men,
you were divinely joined to him and you proclaimed him clearly in the
world as perfect God and perfect man.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[All-wise Apostles, intercede that I may shake off the folly of my soul,
as you have been declared to be truly initiates and revealers of wisdom.
Lighting the light of the Paraclete and burning out the rottenness of my
mind, make me worthy to call you blessed.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Apostles, who saw God, flooded the whole round world with divine
teachings and dimmed the darkness of the idols, enlighten my soul,
darkened by the passions; and now intercede that our souls may be given
GodÂ’s peace and great mercy.[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn14){#_ftnref14}]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Others, of St Nicholas. Joy of the heavenly
hosts.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Flying around the flowers of the Church, like a nestling from the nest
of the Angels on high, thrice-blessed Nicolas, you ever cry to God on
behalf of all of us in the constraints of dangers and temptations, and
you free us by your prayers.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Surveying the beauties of things unseen, you understood that dread
glory, O holy of holies. Therefore you make manifest to us the heavenly
utterances of those ever-living contemplations, most holy
one.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

By practical virtues you made the beauty of your sacred vestment more
resplendent, god-bearing Father. Therefore you minister to us the
wonders of those far-famed contemplations, rescuing us from dangers.

[Glory. Both now.]{style="font-style:normal"} [Theotokion. Same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

Virgin Mother of God who did not know wedlock, who gave birth to God in
the last times and who was revealed again after childbirth to be a pure
virgin, throne[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn15){#_ftnref15} and
gate[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn16){#_ftnref16} and mystical
table[[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn17){#_ftnref17} and
lampstand[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn18){#_ftnref18} formed of light.

[Aposticha of the
Apostles.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The harmonious lyre of the Apostles, struck by the Holy Spirit has
abolished the rites of the loathsome demons, and by proclaiming the one
Lord has freed the nations from the error of idols and taught them to
worship the consubstantial Trinity.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Joy of the heavenly
hosts.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Let us together sing the praises of Peter and Paul, Luke, Matthew,
Mark, John, Andrew, Thomas, Bartholomew, Simon the Canaanite, James,
Philip; and let us fittingly praise the whole assembly of the
Disciples.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Of the Martyrs. Model
Melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[All-praised Martyrs, earth did not hide you, but heaven received you;
For you the gates of Paradise[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn19){#_ftnref19} stood
open, and now within you enjoy the Tree of
life[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn20){#_ftnref20}. Intercede
with Christ that there be granted to our souls his peace and his great
mercy.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now. [Theotokion. Same melody.]{style="color:red;
mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="font-style:normal"}

Virgin all-praised, Moses with prophetic eyes saw the mystery that is in
you, the bush that though in flames was
unburned[[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn21){#_ftnref21}. For the
fire of the Godhead did not burn up your womb, pure Maiden. And so we
ask you, as Mother of our God, to grant peace to the
world.[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

[ON THURSDAY
EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

AT VESPERS

[At]{style="color:red;
letter-spacing:-.1pt;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}*[
]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}*[Lord I have cried ** [Stichera of the
Cross.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}]{style="letter-spacing:
-.1pt"}

[Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly
hosts.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Of old the Forefather tasted death through a
tree[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn22){#_ftnref22}; but now
through a precious Tree all the faithful are ransomed from the
condemÂ­nation of death. All that has
breath[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn23){#_ftnref23}, let us
glorify him who was willingly crucified for us, and who has given light
to the ends of the earth[[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn24){#_ftnref24}.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Hardened in heart, wholly in despair with evil thoughts and being
condemned, I cry out to you: Word of God, alleviate my hidden offences
and the disordered moveÂ­ments of my thoughts, for you are
compassionate.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[We boast in your Cross, O merciful Christ; and, as through it we
utterly destroy the enemyÂ’s deceit, we sing your praise without
ceasing: for willingly lifted up on it in your goodness, O
Compassionate, you have wrought our salvation in the midst of the
earth[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn25){#_ftnref25}.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Of the Mother of God. Same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[O All-holy Virgin, I ever declare you to be my salvation; in you I am
confident of being saved. Snatch me then from every harm, corruption and
passion; from unlooked for evil; and above all from the merciless
instinct for avarice.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Again I call on you, Virgin, Sovereign Lady, against this passion of
love of money, for truly I fear its attacks more than those of a wild
beast. For love of money[[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn26){#_ftnref26}, even in
little thrifty things, is condemned for
them.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Mother of God, give me mighty strength each day to look with a joyful
purpose and generous disposition on paupers and strangers and the
multitudes of poor, to embrace non-possession which can make me GodÂ’s
own.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now. [Cross-Theotokion. Same
melody.]{style="color:red"}]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[When the blameless Virgin saw the Lamb suspended on a Cross, she cried
out in lamentation, Â‘My sweetest Child, what is this new and wondrous
sight? How are you, the One who holds all things in the hollow of your
hand, nailed in flesh to a tree?Â’ ]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Aposticha of the
Cross.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[The Cross was planted on Calvary, and blossomed for us with immortality
from the ever-flowing spring of the SaviourÂ’s
side.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[The SaviourÂ’s precious Cross is an unbreachable wall; for as we have
trusted in it we are all saved.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Of the
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[At the prayers of your Saints, O Lord, and of the Mother of God, give
us your peace, and have mercy on us, for you alone are
compassionate.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[Glory. Both now]{style="font-style:normal"}. [Cross-Theotokion.
All-praised
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Â‘Lifted up on the Cross as the just judge, my sweetest Child, by
tasting vinegar and gall[[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn27){#_ftnref27} you have
made sweet the bitterness that Adam tasted of old; therefore, Master,
bring sweetness to me, who taste the bitter potion of your suffering, by
rising again as All-powerfulÂ’, cried the Virgin as she
wept.]{style="letter-spacing:-.1pt"}

[ON FRIDAY EVENING]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[AT VESPERS**]{style="letter-spacing:
0pt"}

[At]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} ** Lord, I have cried
[we insert Stichera from the Menaion and of the Saint of the Monastery.
If there is nothing in the Menaion, the following
Prosomia.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[Tone 1. All-praised
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

Of old I died by eating from a tree, urged on by the advice of a
serpent, and was exiled, wretch that I am, from your glory. And so, poor
fool, I have been put to death by sin. Then, Lover of mankind, alone
easily reconciled, make me an inhabitant of Paradise.

Having abandoned all things, my soul, consider your last hour, and make
sure you are prepared for your departure, lest sudden death, finding you
unprepared, come and take you. And so, ever watchful,
pray[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn28){#_ftnref28} to the
Lord and weep.

Slay the thought of the passions that trouble me, and calm my disordered
movements by your divine authority, my God, for you are easily
reconciled, compassionate and lover of humankind, granting me, in your
compassion, forgiveness of faults, through the wealth of your loving
kindness.

[Others, of the Mother of God. To the same
melody.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

Holy Bride of God, make me holy, sanctified and sober, meek, still,
well-ordered, upright and[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}devout, true,
courageous, prudent, long-suffering, good, fair and measured, blameless,
unblemished and without censure, and beyond all these a partaker in
Paradise.

Most pure Virgin, I have become fuel for shameless prodigality, an
investigator of transgression, a teacher of passions, a guide to lust,
entertainer of licentiousness, advocate of intemperance, and I have also
taken pleasure in the thought of them. But deliver me from all
destruction.

Dread torrents of sin dreadfully buffet me, pains of
Hell[[\[29\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn29){#_ftnref29} surround
me, the spiritual snare of death awaits me. Merciful Lady, I cry out to
you with grief in my heart, Â‘Hasten, snatch me now from the death of
despair and from the destruction of Hell.**

[Glory. Both now]{style="font-style:normal"}.
[Theotokion]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[.]{style="color:red"}

[L]{style="mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}et us hymn the whole worldÂ’s
glory, engendered from humankind and who gave birth to the Master, the
Gate of heaven[[\[30\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn30){#_ftnref30}, Mary the
Virgin, the song of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful;
for she has been proclaimed Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. She, by
destroying the middle wall of enmity[[\[31\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn31){#_ftnref31}, has
brought peace instead and thrown open the KingÂ’s palace. Therefore,
holding fast to her as anchor of the faith, we have as champion the Lord
born from her. Take courage therefore, take courage, people of
God[[\[32\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn32){#_ftnref32}; for he
will make war on the foe as All-powerful.

[Aposticha for the
Martyrs.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

Your brave confession in the stadium, O Saints, cowed the power of the
demons and freed mankind from error; and therefore, as your heads were
being struck off, you cried, Â‘May the sacrifice of our lives, Lord, be
well-pleasing before you; for longing for you, we despised this
temporary life, O Lover of mankindÂ’.

[Verse: ]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}God is wonderful
in his saints, the God of Israel.

[How fair your enterprise, O Saints! For you gave your blood and
received heaven as your inheritance. You were tested for a time and now
rejoice eternally. Truly your trading was fair! For you abandoned things
corruptible and received things incorruptible, and now, as you dance
with the Angels, you sing without ceasing the praise of the
consubstantial
Trinity.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt; letter-spacing: 0pt"}

[Verse:]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} For his Saints
who in the land the Lord has worked wonders.

\[[Model Melody]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]

All-praised Martyrs, earth did not hide you, but heaven received you.
For you the gates of Paradise stood open, and now within you enjoy the
Tree of life. Intercede with Christ that there be granted to our souls
his peace and great mercy.

[Verse:]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} ** Blessed are
those whom you have chosen and taken, O Lord.

[For the
Dead.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[By Monk John, the Damascene. Tone
1.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}

[W]{style="mso-bidi-font-weight:bold"}hat pleasure in life remains
without its share of sorrow? What glory stands on earth unchanged? All
things are feebler than a shadow; all things are more deceptive than
dreams; one instant, and death supplants them all. But give rest in the
light of your countenance to those whom you have chosen, O Christ, and
in the sweetness of your beauty, as you love humankind.

[Glory. Both now.]{style="font-style:normal"}
[Theotokion.]{style="color:red;font-style:normal;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}[]{style="font-style:normal"}

Holy Virgin Mother of God we greet you with our
Â‘Hail!Â’[[\[33\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn33){#_ftnref33}, honoured
treasure of the whole inhabited world, unquenchable lamp,
place[[\[34\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn34){#_ftnref34} that
contained the Uncontainable, temple that cannot be
destroyed[[\[35\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn35){#_ftnref35}. Hail to
you, from whom was born the Lamb who takes away the sin of the
world[[\[36\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn36){#_ftnref36}.

\[[When it is]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} Alleluia*,*
[the Martyrika are sung
at]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"} ** Lord, I have cried,
[while at the Aposticha we say the 1st Martyrikon and the two for the
Dead.]{style="color:red;mso-bidi-font-style:italic"}\]

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
Cf. Gen 1,1-3.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
Cf. Gen. 2,7.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
Matt. 25:10.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
This list derives from passages like Romans 8,38 and Colossians 1,16,
but its precise form of Nine Choirs comes from Denys the Areopagite, *On
the Heavenly Hierarchy*, 6,2 \[PG
3:200-201\].]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
Cf. Ezekiel 1.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
Matt. 14:28-30.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7}[
John 1:29.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8}[
Matt. 11:28-30.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9}[
Matt. 3:2.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10}[
Cf. Nicene Creed.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11}[
Gen. 3.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref12){#_ftn12}[
Deut. 21:23,
Gal.3:13.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref13){#_ftn13}[
Luke 2:34-35.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn14" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[14\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref14){#_ftn14}[
Psalm 50:1.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn15" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[15\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref15){#_ftn15}[
Exod 1:26.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn16" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[16\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref16){#_ftn16}[
Eze 44:1-3.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn17" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[17\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref17){#_ftn17}[
Exod. 25:23-30.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn18" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[18\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref18){#_ftn18}[
Exod 25:31-35.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn19" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[19\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref19){#_ftn19}[
Gen 3:24.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn20" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[20\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref20){#_ftn20}[
Gen 2:29; 3.24.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn21" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[21\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref21){#_ftn21}[
Exod 3:2.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn22" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[22\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref22){#_ftn22}[
Gen 1-7.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn23" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[23\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref23){#_ftn23}[
Psalm 150:6. The only occurrence of the phrase in the
Bible.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn24" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[24\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref24){#_ftn24}[
Cf. Tobit 13:13, following the text of the Codex Sinaiticus, which is
followed by some modern
translations.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn25" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[25\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref25){#_ftn25}[
Psalm 73:12.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn26" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[26\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref26){#_ftn26}[
1 Tim. 6:10.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn27" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[27\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref27){#_ftn27}[
Psalm 68:22; Matt.
27:34.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn28" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[28\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref28){#_ftn28}[
Matt. 26:41.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn29" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[29\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref29){#_ftn29}[
Psalm 17:6.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn30" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[30\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref30){#_ftn30}[
Gen. 28:17.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn31" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[31\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref31){#_ftn31}[
Eph. 2:14.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn32" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[32\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref32){#_ftn32}[
Baruch 4:5.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn33" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[33\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref33){#_ftn33}[
Luke 1:28.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn34" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[34\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref34){#_ftn34}[
Cf. Eze 3:12, where the words,
Â‘]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}[Blessed be the
glory of the Lord, from his placeÂ’ occur, when the divine Chariot, also
used as a type of the Mother of God, at the end of his initial vision
and call.]{lang="EN-US" style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-ansi-language:EN-US;
mso-bidi-language:HE"}[]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:
10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn35" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[35\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref35){#_ftn35}[
Cf. John 2:19.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn36" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[36\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref36){#_ftn36}[
John 1:29]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
