\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \] \[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \] \[ 5 September \]
\[ [6 September](6_september.md) \] \[ [7 September](07sep.md) \]
\[ [13 September](13sep.md) \] \[ [15 September](15_september.md) \]
\[ [23 September](23sept.md) \] \[ [24 September](24sept.md) \]
\[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

**Commemoration of the holy Prophet Zachary,\
father of the Forerunner.**

AT VESPERS
----------

****

At

Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Stichera and sing the following
Prosomia \[doubling them\].**

Tone 4. You have given as a sign.

Clad in anointing and the divine vestment, revered Zachary, like an
angel you ministered to God, mediating between the Fashioner and his
fashioning, blessed Saint, and receiving clear revelations of the divine
Spirit. And so we call you blessed, and, as we celebrate your holy
festival today, we glorify the Saviour.

Zachary, inspired by God, you saw a Child, like his Father without
beginning, born from the Maiden, and you spoke prophetically to your
child, ‘You will be truly a Prophet, preparing his paths’. With him we
call you blessed, and we observe your revered festival, most blessed
God-bearer.

You became a living and breathing temple of the divine Spirit, and as
with a pure heart you conversed with God in the midst of the temple,
glorious Saint, you were unjustly slaughtered, finishing your godly
course as a martyr, O worthy of praise. And so you ascended to the
heavenly temple, with your own blood beseeching pardon for those who
honour you.

Glory.

**Tone 8. By Monk John.**

Truly robed in the vestment of the priesthood of the Law you ministered
according to the order of Aaron, and as you stood in the temple, O
all-blessed, you clearly beheld an angelic form. And so, as we all
celebrate your translation with songs, as is fitting, we praise you,
Zachary, who in old age put forth glorious John. Intercede for us to the
merciful God that we may be saved.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Lord, at the prayers of her who gave you birth watch over your flock,
which you purchased with your precious blood, as you are compassionate,
and keep it unharmed from the abuse of enemies, so that as we sing your
praise we may glorify your divine condescension.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

When the sun saw you, O Lord, the Sun of righteousness, hanged upon the
tree it hid its rays; and the light of the moon was turned to darkness;
while your all-blameless Mother was wounded to the heart.

****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia.\
Tone 8. O Marvellous wonder!

O marvellous wonder! The Archangel, who stands in God’s presence in the
highest, brings the good tidings of the conception of the Forerunner in
old age from barrenness to Zachary, the godly-minded minister. O your
inexpressible providence, Master! Through which, O Christ, save our
souls, for you alone are compassionate.

****

Verse:

Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people.

O marvellous wonder! Zachary’s dumbness prophesies most clearly the
silence of the Old Covenant and the manifestation of the New; for
silencing the completion of the Law, it revealed the light of grace. O
your wise foresight, Lover of humankind! Through which watch over us
all, as all-powerful.

****

Verse:

And you, Child, will be called the Prophet of the Most High; you will go
before the Lord to prepare his ways.

O marvellous wonder! Zachary is revealed, Master, as a faithful Priest,
a noble Martyr and glorious Prophet, who predicts what is to come,
adorned with a triple crown. O the richness of your gifts, Lover of
mankind! Through them, O Christ, count us all worthy of your kingdom.

Glory.

**Tone 2. By Anatolios.**

As a pure priest you entered the Holy of Holies, and robed in the sacred
vestment you ministered blamelessly to God, giving laws like Aaron,
guiding the tribes of Israel like Moses, with the pure chiming of the
bells; and so too you were slain; but your righteous blood has become
for us a saving remedy and like sweet-scented myrrh opens the ears for
the gaining of eternal life. Thrice-blessed Zachary, father of John the
Baptist and spouse of Elizabeth, intercede insistently on behalf of our
souls.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Truly indeed the multitudes of my iniquities has risen higher than my
head, pure Maiden, and my iniquities have been greatly multiplied and I,
coward and incorrigible, have gained unbearable and measureless burdens.
Do you, then, the only righting of those who sin, by your fervent
intercession come to me and save me.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

Many pains you endured at the crucifixion of your Son and God, O
Immaculate, weeping you groaned and lamented, ‘Alas! my sweetest Child;
how you suffer unjustly, as you wish to deliver all those born from
Adam’. Therefore, all-holy Virgin, we beseech you in faith to make him
merciful to us.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4.

Wrapped in the vestment of priesthood, wise Zachary, you offered in a
manner fitting a priest acceptable whole burnt offerings according to
the Law of God; and you became a beacon and one who contemplated
mysteries, manifestly bearing in yourself, O all-wise, the symbols of
grace. Slain by the sword in God’s temple, Prophet of Christ, with the
Forerunner intercede that our souls may be saved.

AT MATINS

****

The usual Reading from the Psalter and the Canons from the Oktoichos and
of the Saint, of which the Acrostic is:

I applaud the wise High Priest, parent of the Forerunner.

\
**By Theophanes.** ****

Ode 1. Tone 8.

As I praise the memory of your Prophet I entreat the grace of the Spirit
to work with me as I cry aloud with your mediation: Let us sing to our
Redeemer and God.

Your life being found blameless was adorned with the vestment of
priesthood and the light-bearing beams of prophecy, blessed Saint who
spoke from God.

You were shown, Zachary, your head resplendent with the priestly
headband of the Law, and as a revealer of sacred mysteries you cried
aloud: Let us sing to our Redeemer and God.

****

Theotokion.

Robed like Aaron in the priestly tunic you received the Maiden sprung
from Jesse’s root, who bore the Redeemer in her womb.

****

Ode 3.

When you were carrying the incense of the covenant, then, High Priest,
received the birth of the Forerunner.

Like Aaron the sweet myrrh anointed you to act as priest; therefore you
were counted worthy of a vision of an Angel.

Zachary begot John, dawn that foretold you, the spiritual sun, O
Saviour, to the inhabited world.

****

Theotokion.

Make straight my life, all-pure Mother of God, who made radiant the life
and house of Zachary.

****

The Irmos.

You are firm foundation, Lord, of those who have recourse to you; you
are the light of those in darkness; and my spirit sings your praise.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8.

You served as priest to God according to the Law, Zachary, and you
prophesied Christ incarnate from the Virgin and the Holy Spirit. You
appeared to the inhabited world as a pillar of light and spoke of the
daystar of righteousness who would shine on the world from on high and
guide our feet into the way of peace, and who saves mankind.

Glory.

**The same melody.**

Let us now call the son of Barachias blessed, because the righteous
Zachary meditated on the Law like the psalm says day and night and
serving the God of all in the highest, as David, great among the
Prophets, said; and met his end through blood by slaughter, and he was
sacrificed like an acceptable lamb for a whole offering for the Saviour
of our souls.

Both now. **Theotokion.**

Pure Virgin, blessed and graced by God, with the Powers on high, the
Prophets and all the Saints unceasingly intercede for us with the One
born from you through merciful compassion to grant us before the end
correction and pardon of sins and amendment of life, that we may find
mercy.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

Ever guarded by the Cross of your Son and God, O Virgin, we turn back
the assaults of the demons and their wiles; as all we generations hymn
you as really and truly Mother of God and with love call you blessed, as
you prophesied, O Immaculate. And so by your prayers grant us
forgiveness of faults.

****

Ode 4.

Your Prophet, Master, ministered to you faithfully with the figures of
the Law and was counted worthy to see by knowledge the truth of Grace.

By a fainter light you received a clearer light, All-blessed, for by the
Law Grace was truly given you as well.

Gabriel who stands in the presence of God brought you the glad tidings
and revealed to, blessed Saint, the voice and Forerunner of the Word.

****

Theotokion.

The Fashioner of creation, who abolished the barrenness of Elizabeth,
having found in you a pure abode, made you his dwelling.

****

Ode 5.

The turban was placed on your head, glorious Prophet, having on a seal
the imprint of divine grace.

Creation rejoices at your offspring, High Priest, for you put forth the
herald of repentance.

You accomplished your life virtuously, for with Elizabeth you fulfilled
all the commandments of the Lord.

****

Theotokion.

Your tongue is moved to praise, O Saint who spoke from God, for you saw
the one who knew not wedlock great with child.

****

Ode 6.

One who served the shadow of the Law appeared as herald of grace, our
Saviour, for he was counted worthy to see your incarnation.

Adorned with inspired utterance of judgements, priest Zachary, you
received the eternal Word bearing flesh.

You appeared within the confines of the temple conversing with God,
Initiator inspired by God, priest and right worthy minister.

****

Theotokion.

Virgin Mother of God, carrying in your womb the Saviour, the Word
without beginning, you were made known to Elizabeth the Prophetess.

****

The Irmos.

Grant me a tunic of light, most merciful Christ our God, who are wrapped
in light as in a garment.

****

Kontakion. Tone 3.

Today the Prophet and Priest of the Most High, Zachary, the parent of
the Forerunner, sets out a table of his memory, nourishing believers and
mixing for them a drink of righteousness. And so we praise him as a
godly initiate of God’s grace.

****

The Ikos.

The Hierarch received the silence of the Law, through the voice of an
Angel receiving the Angel, Prophet and initiate of the coming of Christ,
with the barren and sober Elizabeth. When he was born grace, redemption
and our universal reconciliation were renewed; for he proclaims the Lamb
and Fashioner, the One who makes nature new, who gives fruit from the
barren, who appeared as Son of the Virgin. He is a godly initiate of
God’s grace.

****

Synaxarion

On the 5th of the same month, Commemoration of Zachary the Prophet and
Father of the Forerunner.

****

Verses

\
Slaughtered just like a lamb was Zachary\
Within the Temple for the Lamb of God;\
Zachary then on the fifth on the Temple’s pavement was slaughtered.

On the same day Saint Abdaios met his end, beaten with rods of thorns.

****

Verses

\
Martyr Abdaios rods of thorn endures,\
Honours his Master who was crowned with thorns.

On the same day Commemoration of the holy Martyrs Medimnos, Urban,
Theodore and with them eighty Priests and Levites, that is Deacons.

****

Verses\

Passing through fire and water, like the Psalm,\
Says Medimnos, I go to find repose.

With Urban too, great Theodore as well\
With Medimnos the selfsame contest wins.

Of consecrated ministers eighteen\
‘Gainst fire and water steadfastly endure.

On the same day Commemoration of Saint Peter of Athira.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7.

When the voice of the one crying came forth from a barren womb, Zachary,
he loosed the bonds of your tongue to cry out: Blessed are you, Lord
God, to the ages.

The Friend of the Bridegroom was born from sterility, the Forerunner,
clearly foreshadowing the Offspring of the Virgin to those who cry out
with faith: Blessed are you, O God, to the ages.

Thrice-blessed Zachary you became wholly a divine instrument of the
Spirit and you foretold that your child would be a prophet, as you
cried: Blessed are you, O Lord, to the ages.

****

Theotokion.

Zachary, seeing you to be the fulfilment of the Law and the climax of
prophecy, acknowledged it as he cried out: Blessed, O all-pure, is the
fruit of your womb.

****

Ode 8.

You were revealed as a teacher of truth, for John the Forerunner going
ahead prepared the paths of Christ, blest Hierarch; him we highly exalt
to all the ages.

With eloquence you bless the Master who has given us salvation, the Lord
of glory who dawned from David in the flesh, whom we highly exalt to the
ages.

You were counted worthy of great gifts of grace, O revealer of God, who
begot the Forerunner, the highest of all the Prophets, who praises and
highly exalts the Lord to all the ages.

****

Theotokion.

Hierarch and herald of God, Zachary rejoiced and worshipped the Mother
and Virgin who carried the Lord of creation. We highly exalt her to all
the ages.

****

The Irmos.

The Lord, who was glorified on the holy mountain and who made known to
Moses the bush and fire the mystery of the Ever-Virgin, praise and
highly exalt to all the ages.

****

Ode 9.

You were filled with the inspiration of the Paraclete and set yourself
to bless the Lord, O holy Priest blessed by God.

When you saw the outcome of the Archangel’s words, All-praised who spoke
from God, at once you moved your tongue to blessing.

The Creator had mercy on the lost clearly remembered the covenant of
Abraham, as you, filled with the Spirit, cried out in prophecy.

You have been adorned, Zachary, with crowns of contest and priesthood
and the illumination of prophecy, and have shared in yet greater glory.

****

Theotokion.

As vessel of the Light, O Virgin, enlighten my soul, darkened by the
passions, and deliver me from the exterior darkness by your prayers.

****

The Irmos.

We who have been saved through you, pure Virgin, confess you to be
indeed Mother of God, as with the Bodiless choirs we magnify you.

****

Exapostilarion.

You served blamelessly as priest to God almighty in the order of the
Law, O Prophet Zachary; and so, as you offered incense, an Angel
appeared to you saying: You will beget the Forerunner of Christ,
mediator between the Law and inspired Grace.

****

Theotokion.

Virgin Mother, the things fulfilled in shadow by the former Law and
image have passed away, for without seed you have given birth to the God
who gave the Law, for the redemption of mortals. And so establish me by
the divine law who am routed by the law of sin.

****

And the rest as usual, and Dismissal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**
