\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jan-int.md) \]
\[ [1 January](1january.md) \] \[ [2 January](jan02.md) \]
\[ [3 January](3_january.md) \] \[ [4 January](4_january.md) \]
\[ [6 January](6january.md) \] \[ [25 January](25_january.md) \]
\[ 10 January \] \[ [17 January](17%20January.md) \]
\[ [28 January](28_january.md) \]

## 

ON THE 10TH OF THE SAME MONTH

# 

Commemoration of our Father among the Saints Gregory, Bishop of Nyssa,
and Dometianos, Bishop of Melitini.

****

AT VESPERS

****

At

** Lord, **I have cried we insert 6 Stichera and sing Prosomia of Saint
Gregory.** ** ****

Tone 5. Venerable Father.

Venerable Father, most holy Gregory; full pen of the breath of the
Advocate and clear tongue of Orthodoxy; lamp of the divine brightness
with many lights; herald of truth, rampart of theology; wellspring of
high doctrines; torrent of teachings that flow with honey; lyre tuned to
God’s voice of songs composed by God that delights the minds of
believers. All-wise Father, entreat Christ, implore Christ, who
refashioned the world in the streams of Jordan, to save our souls.

Venerable Father, all-honoured Gregory; axe that fells the assaults of
heretics, two-edged sword of the Advocate; knife that cuts out
adulterated seeds; fire that burns up the undergrowth of heresies; true
farmer’s winnowing fan by which the weight and lightness of doctrines is
well distinguished; measuring rod of strict accuracy that directs all
into paths of salvation. Ever entreat Christ, implore Christ, who
refashioned the world in the streams of Jordan, to save our race.

Venerable Father, all-blessed Gregory; mouth that pours out blessed
words, drawing them from the inexhaustible and divine wells of
salvation, expounding for all words of prayer; rule that directs to
virtue; you became radiant by contemplation of things divine, illumined
by the brightness of the uncreated Trinity, whose invincible champion
you became. Venerable Father, entreat Christ, implore Christ, who
refashioned the world in the streams of Jordan, to save our race.

****

Prosomia Stichera of St Dometianos.  
Tone 1. All-praised Martyrs.

Glory.

**Of Saint Gregory.  
Tone 4.**

Making your word of wisdom radiant by unapproachable virtue, Gregory of
Nyssa, you became all fair in both, with your voice inspired by God
beautifying and delighting the people spiritually, expounding with great
wisdom the consubstantial godhead of the Trinity; and so, making war
with orthodox doctrines on outlandish heresies, you roused the might of
the faith to the ends of the earth. As you stand by Christ with the
bodiless Ministers, ask for our souls his peace and great mercy.

Both now.

**Of the Feast, same Tone.**

The hand of the Baptist trembled when it touched your immaculate head;
the river Jordan was turned back, not daring to minister to you; for how
could the river that had stood in awe of Jesus son of Navi not be seized
with alarm at its Maker? But you, our Saviour, fulfilled the whole
dispensation, that you might save the world by your Epiphany, only lover
of humankind.

****

Aposticha. Prosomia Stichera.  
Tone 2. House of Ephratha.

Let the whole earth sing a new song to Christ, born from a Virgin and
today baptised in Jordan.

****

Verse:

The sea saw and fled; Jordan was turned back.

Let the Forerunner, prophetic trumpet, cry, ‘Produce the fruits of noble
deeds for the Lord baptised in Jordan’.

****

Verse:

What troubled you, sea, that you fled? And you, Jordan, that you were
turned back?

The consubstantial divine Spirit, shining from above and seen ineffably
in the form of a dove, now hastens towards Christ.

Glory.

**Of St Gregory.  
Tone 4.**

Having achieved a life inspired by God, you made its practice bright by
contemplation, Gregory, revealer of God; for loving wisdom with divine
ardour, you were enriched with grace from the mouth of the Spirit.
Distilling the sweetness of your words like honeycomb, you ever make
God’s Church joyful with divine thoughts. And so, as you dwell a high
priest in heaven, intercede unceasingly for us who celebrate your
memory.

Both now.

**Of the Feast, same Tone.**

When the Baptist saw you, who take away the sin of the world by spirit
and fire,\[4\] coming to him, quailing and trembling he cried, ‘I do not
dare to grasp your immaculate head. But sanctify me, Master, by your
Epiphany, only lover of humankind’.

****

Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 4.

God of our Fathers, who always deal with us in your forbearance, do not
deprive us of your mercy, but at their intercessions guide our life in
peace.

****

And of the Feast. Tone 1.

As you were baptized in the Jordan, Lord, the worship of the Trinity was
made manifest; for the voice of the Father bore witness to you, naming
you the Beloved Son; and the Spirit, in the form of a dove, confirmed
the sureness of the word. Christ God, who appeared and enlightened the
world, glory to you\!

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

