# ON THE 11TH OF THE SAME MONTH

Commemoration of our Venerable Father Theodosios the Koinoviarch.

**AT VESPERS**

We recite the 1st Section of \[the 1st Kathisma\] ‘Blessed is the man’.
At Lord I have cried we insert 6 Stichera, and we sing Prosomia of the
Saint.

Tone 5. Venerable Father.

Venerable Father, God-bearer Theodosios, valiantly you struggled in this
temporary life, by hymns and fasts and vigils becoming a model for your
disciples, while now you dance with the Bodiless Powers, as you
ceaselessly glorify Christ, God from God, Word and Redeemer, who bowed
down his to the Forerunner and sanctified the nature of the waters.
Entreat him, implore him, Venerable Father, that the Church may be given
harmony, peace and great mercy. \[Twice\]

Venerable Father, God-bearer Theodosios, the grace of the All-holy
Spirit, finding your pure soul, as it desired, dwelt in you as an
immaculate light. By its action you became radiantly bright and you
ceaselessly glorify Christ, the one Son in two natures, who was baptized
by the hand of the Forerunner and witnessed to by the Father’s voice.
Entreat him, implore him, Venerable Father, that the inhabited world may
be given harmony, peace and great mercy. \[Twice\]

Venerable Father, God-bearer Theodosios, rightly you were counted worthy
of the blessed life, having found it by purity and ascetic practice; for
while living you passed over to the life on high, bidding all things
farewell, and with the Bodiless Powers ceaselessly glorifying Christ,
who took flesh ineffably from a Virgin and sunk our sins by Baptism in
Jordan’s streams. Entreat him, implore him, Venerable Father, that the
inhabited world may be given harmony, peace and great mercy. \[Twice\]

Glory. Tone 2.

Venerable Father, they rejoice your holy soul like a city of the living
God, the torrents of the river, of the water of forgiveness, of the One
who passed through Jordan and for all the ends of the earth became a
source of the message of true religion, Christ our God. Implore him,
most blessed Theodosios that our souls may be saved.[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

Both now. Same Tone.

You bowed your head to the Forerunner, you crushed the heads of the
dragons,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) you took your stand in the streams, you
enlightened the universe to glorify you, O Saviour, the enlightenment of
our souls.

Entrance, ‘O Joyful Light’. Prokeimenon of the day and the Readings.
\[See the [Prophetologion for 11 January](readings_for_january.md)\]

Aposticha Prosomia Stichera of the Feast[\[3\]](#_ftn3).  
Tone 4. You have given as a sign.

Ι ‘See how I wear your image which I fashioned, humbling myself beyond
understanding’, said the Lord, ‘What is strange then, my friend, if I
bow low beneath your right hand, like one of your fellow servants, and
stripped naked wrap myself in the waters? For I wish to clothe those who
have been stripped naked with everlasting incorruption.’

Verse: The sea saw and fled; Jordan was turned back[\[4\]](#_ftn4).

Ω ‘You appeared in a body, but a womb received you and remained
unconsumed by fire; for the furnace of old which did not burn the Youths
was its image. While I who am grass to fire, how may I place my hands on
you, Master, before whom tremble all things in heaven and on earth?
Jesu, all-powerful, the Saviour of our souls’.

Verse: What troubled you, sea, that you fled? And you, Jordan, that you
were turned back?[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

Σ ‘Wash me, who am wholly without stain, in the waters of Jordan’, said
the Lord, ‘and human nature, stained by Adam’s transgression, when
washed will become new. For when I am baptised, there is the rebirth of
every human being through water and the Spirit’.

Glory. Tone 8.  
By the Studite.

We, the multitudes of monastics, honour you, our Father Theodosios, for
through you we have learnt to walk the truly straight path. Blessed are
you, for you became Christ’s slave and triumphed over the power of the
foe, companion of Angels, colleague of the Venerable and the Righteous.
With them intercede with the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Apolytikion. Tone 8.

With the streams of your tears you cultivated the barren desert, and
with deep sighings from the heart you made your toils bring forth fruit
a hundredfold, and you became a beacon, shining in all the world by your
wonders, our venerable Father Theodosios; intercede with Christ God that
our souls may be saved.

Of the Feast. Tone 1.

As you were baptized in the Jordan, Lord, the worship of the Trinity was
made manifest; for the voice of the Father bore witness to you, naming
you the Beloved Son; and the Spirit, in the form of a dove, confirmed
the sureness of the word. Christ God, who appeared and enlightened the
world, glory to you\!

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) This Doxastikon is based on the Psalm 45:5, ‘The
torrents of the river rejoice the city of God; the Most High has
sanctified his tabernacle’. The river is identified with Christ, or with
the Holy Spirit, in a number of passages from the Fathers. Euthymios
Zigavenos comments, ‘The river is Christ, because of the sweet streams
of his teachings that water and rejoice the souls of Christians and
bring to produce the fruits of virtue. For the Lord says, through
Isaias, ‘See, I turn towards them as a river of peace’ \[66:12\]’. The
torrents are also identified with the Apostles.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Psalm 73:13.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) The three prosomia in Tone 4 look like part of an
acrostic poem by Joseph the Hymnographer and are part of dialogue
between Christ and St John the Baptist. I have included the Greek
initial letters to indicate this. There is a similar problem in the
Aposticha of Lauds on the 4th and 5th of January, where a poem of Joseph
has been dismembered and rearranged.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Psalm 113:3.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Psalm 113:5.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

