\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ [6 September](6_september.md) \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ 15 September \] \[ [23 September](23sept.md) \]
\[ [24 September](24sept.md) \] \[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

## 

SEPTEMBER 15TH

Commemoration of the Great Martyr Niketas.

****

AT VESPERS

At

** Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 stichera and sing 3 prosomia of the
Cross and 3 of the Saint.**

Of the Feast. Tone 5. Χαίροις ἀσκητικῶν.

Hail, life-bearing Cross, unconquerable trophy of true religion, door of
Paradise, support of the faithful, rampart of the Church. Through you
corruption is wiped out and destroyed, the power of death is swallowed
up, and we are exalted from earth to heaven: invincible weapon, opponent
of demons, glory of martyrs, true ornament of monks, harbour of
salvation, bestowing on the world God’s great mercy.

Hail, Cross of the Lord\! Through you humanity has been released from
the curse; sign of true joy, who shatter enemies by your exaltation, O
all-venerable: our help, strength of Kings, power of the just, majesty
of priests. Those who are marked with you are freed from dangers; rod of
power, under which we are shepherded; weapon of peace, round which
Angels stand in fear; divine glory of Christ, who grants the world his
great mercy.

Hail, guide of the blind, physician of the weak, resurrection of all the
dead, O precious Cross, who raised us up when we had fallen into
corruption. Through you corruption has been destroyed and incorruption
has flowered; we mortals are made divine and the devil is utterly cast
down. To-day, as we see you raised up in the hands of High Priests, we
exalt him who was exalted in your midst, and we venerate you, as we
plenteously draw from you his great mercy.

****

Of the Martyr. Tone 1. Τῶν οὐρανίων.

By enduring tortures you defeated the avenging spirit, inspired Martyr,
with the all-valiant faith of the Saviour; and so, wise Saint, you
turned barbarians back to the Master and Maker of all things, and they
devoutly glorify him.

You appeared, most holy Martyr, as the spoils from the barbarians
bringing glory to Christ, inspired champion, in dying for the Trinity;
and so you received the garland of victory and you shine like a beacon
in the world.

Clothed in the devout panoply of Christ the King, O champion Niketas,
you were presented for war; as Gedeon the most mighty you cast down the
hordes of foreigners by your valiant boldness.

Glory. **

**Tone 6. By Theophanes.**

We acknowledge you to a be a beacon among Martyrs, Niketas, athlete of
Christ; for you abandoned the glory of earthly rank, despising your
ancestral godlessness, and you destroyed their gods and victoriously
shamed the barbarians by accomplishing the witness of confession for
Christ; and you have become a soldier of the God of heaven, as you
implore the benefactor of all to have pity and to save our souls.

Both now. **

**The same Tone.**

The voices of the Prophets foretold the holy Tree, through which Adam
was freed from the ancient curse; while creation today raises its voice
as the Cross is exalted, as it asks for God’s rich mercy. But Master,
alone measureless in mercy, be our atonement and save our souls.

****

Entrance. Prokeimenon. Tone 7.

Our God is in heaven and earth: he has done whatever he willed.

****

Verse:

** When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a barbarous
people. ****

Verse:

The sea saw and fled, the Jordan was turned back. ****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia. Tone 6. Ὅλην ἀποθέμενοι.

The Cross, raised up, urges all creation to praise the immaculate
suffering of him who was raised upon it; for by it he slew the one who
slew us, gave back life to the dead, adorned them and granted them the
life of heaven through his surpassing goodness, as he is compassionate;
and so let us gladly exalt his name and magnify his supreme
condescension.

****

Verse:

Exalt the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool, for he is
holy.

When he stretched out his hands on high and routed the tyrant Amalek,
Moses prefigured you, O precious Cross, boast of the faithful, strength
of athletes, ornament of Apostles, champion of the Just, salvation of
all the Saints; and so creation, seeing you raised up, rejoices and
keeps festival, glorifying Christ, who through you joined together by
his supreme goodness what had been parted.

****

Verse:

God is our King; he has wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

All-honoured Cross, round which the ranks of Angels stand with gladness,
exalted to-day by divine command, you raise up all who had been thrust
out by the theft of food and slipped down to death; and so with heart
and lips we faithfully embrace you as we draw from you sanctification,
crying out: Exalt Christ the God supremely good, and worship his divine
footstool\!

Glory.

**Tone 8.**

All-honoured Martyr Nikitas, you were revealed as named after victory
when you proclaimed Christ our God in the stadium and confessed him
before kings and tyrants; therefore do not cease to intercede with the
only lover of mankind for the peace of the world, and for Christ-loving
monarchs and all who faithfully celebrate your memory to be delivered
from all wrath.

Both now.

**The same Tone.**

The word of your Prophet Moses is fulfilled, O God, which said: You will
see your life hang before your eyes. To-day the Cross is exalted, and
the world has been freed from error. To-day the Church of Christ’s
resurrection is dedicated, and the ends of the earth rejoice, as they
offer you a hymn with cymbals like David and say: You have wrought
salvation in the midst of the earth, O God: Cross and Resurrection,
through which you have saved us, O good one who love mankind.
All-powerful Lord, glory to you\!

****

Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 4.

Your Martyr, O Lord.

****

And of the Feast. Tone 1.

Lord, save your people.

****

And Dismissal.

****

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.  
Tone 1. Τοῦ λίθου σφραγισθέντος.

We worship the tree of your Cross, O Lover of mankind, because you, the
life of all, were nailed upon it. You opened Paradise, O Saviour, to the
Thief when he came to you with faith, and he was granted its delight
when he confessed to you: Remember me, O Lord. Receive us too like him,
as we cry: We have all sinned; in your compassion do not despise us.

Glory. Both now.

**The same.**

After the 2nd reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.  
Tone 1. Τὸν τάφον σου Σωτήρ.

When you stretched out your hands on the Cross, O Merciful, the nations
that had gone far from you, you gathered together to glorify you
goodness; but look upon your inheritance and cast down those who war
against us by your precious Cross.

Glory. Both now.

**The same.**

And the Canons of the Feast and of the Saint, of which the acrostic
\[including the Theotokia\] is:

The champion named victory \[*nike*\] I praise.

**  
By Theophanes.**

Ode 1. Tone 4. Θαλάσσης τὸ ἐρυθραῖον.

As noblest victor slay my carnal thought and flood my mind with your
illuminating brightness, to hymn your festival, Nikitas, as you
intercede with Christ.

Rejecting the poison which comes from the passions, you bravely endured
tortures, and put on as a martyr the honoured tunic, woven from your
blood.

Nailed for us to the tree, you showed a new and wondrous way of contest;
for you became, Master, the first fruits of the Martyrs’ confession and
courage.

****

Theotokion.

The gate of your condescension towards us, Lord, made you flash out like
lightning, who are mystically named Dayspring, Sun and Light, double in
nature, the Lover of mankind.

****

Ode 3. Εὐφραίνεται ἐπὶ σοί.

With courage of soul you bore the threats of the tyrants, glorious
Martyr of Christ, strengthened by divine power.

You bore the laceration of your flesh and the severing of your limbs,
all-praised Martyr of Christ; while you kept your soul close-knit.

The company of Christ’s Martyrs rejoices over you, as it sees your
memory being celebrated to-day.

****

Theotokion.

O Mary, the pure and holy dwelling of virginity, heal the deep wounds of
my heart.

****

The Irmos.

Your Church rejoices over you, O Christ, as she cries, ‘You are my
strength, Lord, my refuge and my foundation’.

****

Kathisma. Tone 4. Ταχὺ προκατάλαβε.

By taking your delight in the toils of the flesh, blessed Martyr, you
have fittingly received the divine delight without toil of Paradise,
accepting from God a garland of immortality; and so you well up with
rivers of wonders for those who with love take refuge under your
protection.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Theotokion. Same melody.**

Come swiftly to our aid, Christ our God, before we are enslaved to foes
who blaspheme you and threaten us; by your Cross destroy those who make
war on us; let them know the strength of the faith of the Orthodox, at
the prayers of the Mother of God, O Lover of mankind.

****

Ode 4. Ἐπαρθέντα σε ἰδοῦσα.

Taking his pleasure in the contemplation of the Lord, and his delight in
his radiance, the Martyr was unaware of suffering and cried aloud with
joy: Glory to you power, O Lord\!

Redeemed by the blood of the Master, the athlete Nikitas brings his own
blood joyfully to Christ; and while being slain for him cried out: Glory
to you, my God\!

On fire with love for the Saviour, the Martyr trampled down the flame of
idolatry and all the strength of the demons, and he cries out to the
creator: Glory to your power, O Lord\!

****

Theotokion.

Made beautiful by the outpouring of many-coloured light, your living
heaven, O Christ, the King of kings, the immaculate Virgin is now
glorified as Mother of God.

****

Ode 5. Σὺ Κύριε μου φῶς.

Who can recount your triumphs, all-praised Nikitas, the crowns which
Christ bestows on you, who competed for his sake?

The Martyrs, having on earth accomplished their struggles, received from
you, O Giver of life, a heavenly reward in the highest.

Now, O all-praised Nikitas, you shine like a beacon, declared to be
second light as you stand gloriously beside the great light.

****

Theotokion.

Mother of God, you bore the timeless light, subject to time for us in
the darkness of life, and you shed light on the world.

****

Ode 6. Θύσω σοι, μετὰ φωνῆς.

You were enraptured by the beauties of the Creator, glorious Martyr, and
having received reflections from them, you took wing, blessed saint, and
despising death, departed to him.

With sober reasoning, O Martyr Nikitas, you preferred things that are
never exhausted to those that flow away, and you handed over your body
to the tortures with joy.

****

Theotokion.

The spiritual Bridegroom, when he found you as an apple in the forest, a
most pure lily, a flower of the valleys, O Mother of God, in you he took
up his dwelling.

****

The Irmos.

I will sacrifice to you with a voice of praise, the Church cries out to
you, cleansed from the filth of demons by the blood that flowed through
pity from your side.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Τὰ ἂνω ζητῶν..

Having cut down the might of error by your exertion, and received the
garland of victory by your struggle, you rejoice glorious Nikitas, named
for victory, with the Angels, as with them you intercede with Christ God
unceasingly for us all.

****

The Ikos.

By putting knowledge in my soul, make my mind pure, O Saviour, and me a
worker of your commandments, that I may have strength to wrestle
victoriously with the many different assaults of my passions and to
receive the victor’s prize of incorruption at the prayers of your noble
champion Nikitas, O Lover of mankind; for he has called us together in
his memory, as he intercedes unceasingly for us all.

****

Synaxarion.

On the 15th of the same month, Contest of the holy Great Martyr Nikitas.

****

Verses.

  
You burn, Nikitas, and bear off the victory \[*nike*\],  
Or rather Fire-bearer is Victory-bearer.  
And on the fifteenth day, Nikitas was cast in the furnace.

He was born in the reign of Constantine the Great and brought up in the
country of the barbarians called Goths, beyond the Danube. But he did
not join with the barbarians, but was of the devout just as was
outstanding by race and property. He was arrested by the ruler of the
nation Athenariches because of his faith in Christ, savagely tortured
and he died by fire.

On the same day, commemoration of our venerable Father Philotheos,
Presbyter and wonderworker.

****

Verses.

  
Philotheos, who lived as God’s \[*theou*\] good friend, \[*philos*\]  
Has found unending life with God’s good friends.

He was from a village called Myrmix, of the district of Opsikios, and
had a name which corresponded to his father’s. For he was called
Theophilis. Having married and become the father of children, he was
found worthy of the priesthood. From then on he fasted and was devoted
to prayer and became the author of mighty wonders. He provided bread for
the destitute poor, he changed a stream of water into wine, he moved a
huge stone and a year after his death, as he was being moved to a
another place, he stretched out his hands, as though alive, and having
grasped the shoulders of the two priests who wished to move him, he
arose and having walked three paces, he was put down in the place where
he lies. He also causes a wondrous and unending spring of sweet myrrh to
gush out, so providing a marvellous proof of his way of life.

On the same day commemoration of St Porphyrios the Actor.

****

Verses.

  
Urged to mock Baptism, you mocked at error,  
You cleanse yourself, Porphyrios, and are slain.

He was ordered by Julian, during the celebration of his birthday, to
insult and mock at Christians rites, and as he was about to plunge into
water and be baptised he shouted: Porphyrios is baptised in the name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit. He came up out of the
water and put on white garments, and having boldly confessed himself a
Christian his head was cut off.

On the same day the Finding of the relics of Saint Akakios, Bishop of
Melitini.

****

Verses.

  
The Finding of your relics as we honour,  
Release from ills \[*kakon*\] Akakios may we find.

On the same day the holy Martyr Maximos died by the sword.

****

Verses.

  
Seeing Christ stretching out to you a crown  
You stretch your head out Maximos to the sword.

On the same day, two holy Maidens died by the sword.

****

Verses.

  
Having but one intent and one desire,  
Two maidens bowed their necks before the sword.

On the same day, Finding of the relics of the holy Protomartyr Stephen.

****

Verses.

  
Saint Stephen’s finding all creation shares,  
He the first champion of the greatest God.

Our father among the saints Vessarion, archbishop of Larissa, died in
peace.

The venerable Gerasimos, founder of the monastery of the Holy Trinity,
known as Sourvia, which is near Makrynitsa of Zagora, died in peace.

The holy new martyr, John the Cretan, was martyred in New Ephesus in
1811 and died by the sword.

****

Ode 7. Ἐν τῇ καμινῳ.

Now bathed in the unapproachable radiance, O Martyr, shine with your
light on those who now hymn your feast, as you cry: Blessed are you, my
God and Lord\!

The armies of the Angels were utterly amazed at your courage, blessed
Martyr, as they watched you bravely struggling and crying: Blessed are
you in the temple of your glory, O Lord\!

****

Theotokion.

With the choir above, the bodiless Gabriel rejoicing cries to you: Hail,
all-pure Mother of God. Blessed are you among women, O All-blameless\!

****

Ode 8. Χεῖρας ἐκπετάσας.

You offered yourself, unconquerable Martyr, as a complete and acceptable
victim, and became a whole burnt-offering of sweet savour to your Master
who was crucified for us, as you cried out with joy: All you works of
the Lord, bless the Lord\!

As a godly warrior you routed the regiments of the foe like a
professional and so fittingly received the unfading crown of victory
from the life-bearing right-hand, beside which you now stand and sing:
All you works, bless the Lord\!

In your unquenchable love for Christ you mingled your blood with his,
cut down by scourgings and slain in divers ways; with him now, as his
imitator, you now reign as you cry aloud: All you works of the Lord,
bless the Lord\!

****

Theotokion.

By bearing Christ, the only immaculate, you clearly washed away the
filth of our nature, all-blameless Mother of God; and you have become
higher than the Cherubim and Seraphim, who cry aloud: All you works,
bless the Lord\!

****

The Irmos.

Daniel, stretching out his hands, stopped up the jaws of lions in the
den; while the Youths, lovers of true religion, armed with virtue,
quenched the power of fire as they cried, All you works of the Lord,
bless the Lord\!’

****

Ode 9. Λίθος ἀχειρότμητος.

I offer myself wholly to you, Nikitas blessed by God, that I may be rich
with you as champion before the Master who has power to save from every
circumstance and as advocate of divine salvation.

Truly, brave Champion, you were declared to be a martyr for the truth,
and now you stand rejoicing beside the honoured and empersonned truth,
having by boldness obtained the rewards of your contests.

You have come to anchor in a calm anchorage, where you have found rest
from your toils, and bearing a crown your dance in Paradise with
Christ’s Martyrs; and so, all-blessed, fittingly we all glorify you.

Vouchsafe, I pray, unstinted grace to me, who have eagerly woven for you
crowns of praise in words, delivering me, all-blessed, from my sin and
from my dreadful deeds by your prayers.

****

Theotokion.

Outside the laws of nature, O blessed Immaculate, you bear the lawgiver,
through his unsearchable compassion incarnate without change and known
in two natures.

****

The Irmos.

A cornerstone uncut by hand, O Virgin, was cut from you, the unhewn
mountain, Christ who joined together separated natures; and so with
gladness, Mother of God, we magnify you.

****

Exapostilarion of the Martyr. ** Τοῖς Μαθηταῖς συνέλθωμεν*.*

As you routed the insolence of barbarians and the raving of tyrants,
all-wise Martyr, by the power of the Cross, stop the rebellions of our
flesh, noble champion Nikitas, and the assaults of the passions by your
prayers, granting us release from sins, as you have gained unlimited
boldness towards God.

****

And of the Feast. Τῶν Μαθητῶν ὁρώτων σε.

The Cross is the guardian of the whole world; the Cross is the beauty of
the Church; the Cross is the might of Kings; the Cross is the support of
the faithful; the Cross is the glory of Angels and the wound of demons.

****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia.  
Tone 2. Οἶκος τοῦ Ἐφραθᾶ.

To-day the Cross of Christ, the life-bearing tree is exalted, on which
to call all back he was nailed in the flesh.

****

Verse:

Exalt the Lord our God, and bow down before his footstool; for he is
holy.

Hail, divine guard of the faithful, invincible wall, Cross of the Lord,
through which we have been raised from earth.

****

Verse:

God is our King from of old; he has wrought salvation in the midst of
the earth.

Come, let us all in harmony greet the saving tree, on which Christ, our
redemption was stretched out.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

To-day the whole inhabited world is gladdened by the struggle of the
champion; and the Church of Christ, made beautiful with flowers, cries
out to you, Martyr of Christ: Servant of Christ, fervent protector, do
not cease to intercede for all your servants.

Both now. **

**Same Tone.**

To-day the tree of life on which Christ was nailed is lifted up from the
hidden places of the earth, confirming the resurrection; and lifted up
by priestly hands declares his raising to the heavens, by which our
matter, raised from its fall to the earth, becomes a citizen of heaven.
And so with thanksgiving let us cry aloud: Lord, who were lifted up upon
it, and through it lifted us up with yourself, make those who sing your
praise worthy of the joy of heaven\!

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

