\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](oct-int.md) \]
\[ [1 October](1october.md) \] \[ [6 October](6october.md) \]
\[ [Holy Fathers](octpate.md) \] \[ 18 October \]
\[ [26 October](26oct.md) \]

# Commemoration of the holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.

## AT VESPERS

**At** Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Stichera and sing the following
Prosomia.**

Tone 8. What may we call you.

What may I name you, Apostle? Heaven, for you declared the glory of God.
Lightning, for you irradiate the world by your illumination. Cloud, that
rains down divine streams. Mixing-bowl overflowing with the inspired
wine of wisdom, wine that makes hearts glad. Intercede that our souls
may be saved.

How may I now address you, O inspired by God? River, coming forth from
Paradise for us. Ark of the covenant which Christ laid down. Beacon,
blazing with spiritual light. Lamp, that irradiates the Church. Bread of
life, divine table, cup of divine drink. Intercede that our souls may be
saved.

What may we now call you, who saw God? Most active minister of the
mysteries of Christ. Wise architect of the spiritual tabernacle, who
carve out the tables of grace, having written down the new law which
comes forth from Sion and is proclaimed through you. Intercede that our
souls may be saved.

What may we now call you, glorious Saint? Safe treasury of the gifts of
heaven’s grace. Skilled physician of both souls and bodies. Paul’s
co-worker and companion of his journeys, who set down the Acts of the
Apostles. Virtue, Luke, has made for you many names. Intercede that our
souls may be saved.

What titles may I address you by, Inspired of God? Disciple, for you to
us you proclaimed the good tidings: Christ. Physician, for you heal the
passions of our souls. Lamp, blazing with spiritual light. Base and
foundation of the faith, for it was you who traced out for us the
all-revered Gospel. Intercede that our souls may be saved.

How may I now address you, wondrous Saint? Unerring contemplator of
wisdom’s teachings. Active writer of the teaching of the Apostles and
unshakeable pillar of true religion, or indestructible tower of the
Church. Many are you achievements and greater your graces. Intercede
that our souls may be saved.

Glory.

**Tone 6. By Anatolios.**

Apostle of Christ, Writer of the doctrines of God and foundation of the
Church. It was you who with divine words truly drew out and saved as
from the rolling swell hearts in the gloom of ignorance sunk in the deep
of destruction. You became the companion of Paul, the vessel of
election, but also his imitator. Therefore we entreat you, most noble
Luke, adornment of the people of Antioch. Intercede with the Saviour and
God, for those who with faith celebrate your ever-revered memory.

Both now.

**Theotokion. You rose on the third day**

O Trinity of infinite power, Unity of three Persons, at the prayers of
your honoured Disciple and godly Apostle, and of the Ever-Virgin, save
those who sing your praise.

****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia. Tone 5. Hail, of ascetics.

Grace was poured out on your lips in a fiery tongue, Apostle Luke, and
you were revealed as a tongue of fire as you sent forth words of light
by your preaching for those worthy of light, but bolts of shame for
those who longed for the darkness, as you wrote and taught the honoured
Gospel; and you appeared as a fragrance of life for those who truly
wished for life, as Paul said, whom you had as teacher; but again as the
odour of death for those who did not love life. But grant us peace and
life and light and God’s great mercy.

****

Verse:

** His sound has gone out into all the earth; and his words to the ends
of the world.

From your words we have come to know, as you said, the sureness of the
words which you set forth, inspired Initiate, since you undertook to
write for us about the things of which you had been informed and as they
had handed on to you, those who before had been the eye-witnesses. Whose
equal you became and a servant of the incarnation of the Word, whom you
saw after the resurrection at Emmaus, and ate with him with heart aflame
along with Cleopas. Fill too with his divine fervour the souls of us who
honour you.

****

Verse:

The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims the
work of his hands.

Hail, who alone wrote down for us the ‘Hail’ as you hailed the good
tidings of the Pure Virgin, and the Baptist who called her ‘Mother of
the Lord’ from the womb, of whose conception too you wrote, and the
incarnation of the Word, his temptations, marvels, words and sufferings,
his cross and death and rising, which you saw, and his ascension and the
descent of the Spirit, and the acts of the heralds and especially those
of Paul, companion of whose journeys you were named, healer and Initiate
and beacon of the Church. Watch over her always.

****

Then the following Idiomel.

Verse:

Grace was poured out on your lips, therefore God has blessed you for
ever. ****

Tone 4. By Basil.

As you searched the depth of the spiritual sea with the fishing rod of
Wisdom, all-blessed Luke, you caught from the death-bearing deep the
souls of the faithful. Therefore, having become Paul’s disciple, you
cleansed your whole heart by the radiance of the Spirit; and having
enlightened the nations by your doctrines and healed by your wonders all
the diseases of the passions, you ever implore Christ God for us that
our souls may be saved.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

All-wise Fisherman, holy Disciple, workman of the Saviour and proclaimer
of his sufferings, when you had sped through creation by faith, gathered
all the nations from error and offered them as incense to God you took
the fair way to heaven. And so as you stand before the Judge intercede
that we may be delivered from our iniquities and rescued from eternal
punishment on the day of judgement.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

My Maker and Redeemer, Christ the Lord, came forth from your womb, O
all-pure, clothed himself in me and freed Adam from the former curse.
And so, All-pure, as to God’s Mother and truly Virgin, we cry to you
without ceasing the Angel’s ‘Hail’. Hail, Sovereign Lady, protection and
shelter and salvation of our souls.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 3.

Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke, intercede with the merciful God to
grant our souls forgiveness of sins.

Glory. Both now. **

**Theotokion.**

Virgin Mother of God, we hymn you as the means of the salvation of our
race; for your Son and our God, who through the Cross accepted suffering
in the flesh which had been taken from you, has redeemed us from
corruption as he loves mankind.

****

And Dismissal.

## 

AT MATINS

****

After the usual Reading from the Psalter the Canons from the Oktoichos
are sung and the following of the Apostle to 6.

A Composition by Theophanes.

Ode 1. Tone 8.

Knowing your mouth, O wise Apostle Luke, to be a divine mixing bowl of
the wisdom from in high and enriched with the great and ineffable
treasure of grace we draw from it eagerly, as we chant to the Lord; for
he has been greatly glorified.

By leading you into the mysteries of heaven and opening to you at once
the scriptures inspired by God, Apostle Luke, Christ shows you to be an
initiate and wise herald of things beyond understanding, as you
vigorously cry out, ‘Let us sing to the Lord; for he has been greatly
glorified.’

Christ’s Church ordained you, all-blessed Luke, to be the companion of
Paul’s journeys, as you shone out directly with his grace and followed
in his footsteps, and cried with him, ‘‘Let us sing to the Lord; for he
has been greatly glorified.’

****

Theotokion.

Apostle Luke, you made clear the manner of the ineffable and divine
conception by the all-praised pure Virgin; for the all-holy Spirit came
upon her, and the Word overshadowed her. To him we chant with one
accord; for he has been greatly glorified.

****

Ode 3. You are the foundation.

Your Gospel, inspired Luke, makes present the Dayspring from on high
that has overshadowed mankind.

Devoutly performing acts with noble inspiration, you recounted in
writing those of the Apostles.

The blessed Paul wove for you the first fruits of praise, and entrusted
to writing your encomium.

****

Theotokion.

As you prophesied, O Immaculate, all the generations of mankind now call
you blessed, for through you they are now saved.

****

Irmos.

You are the foundation, Lord, of those who have recourse to you; you are
the light of those in darkness, and my spirit sings your praise.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

Revealed as the companion of Paul’s journeys, you bravely endured
dangers of many kinds, all-praised Apostle of the Lord; and having
completed the course of the faith by contest, blessed Saint, you rejoice
with him in the highest. Therefore, having proclaimed to the world the
Gospel of Christ, you enlightened the whole earth under heaven.
All-honoured Luke, intercede with Christ God to grant forgiveness of
faults to those who celebrate with love your holy memory.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Let us sing the praise of the heavenly gate and ark, the all-holy
mountain, the cloud of light, the bush unburned, the spiritual Paradise,
the restoration of Eve, the great foundation of the whole inhabited
world, because salvation was wrought in her for the world and
forgiveness of the ancient crimes. Because of this we cry to her:
Intercede with your Son and God to grant forgiveness of faults to those
who worship in faith your immaculate birth-giving.

****

Ode 4. You mounted upon horses.

As you were seen to be enlightened by the radiance of the Spirit, you
were counted worthy to depict by your hands his laws for those who love
God, those who sing with faith, ‘Glory to your power, O Lord\!’

The grace of the Paraclete, having found you as his dwelling, was poured
out richly on your lips, and revealed you as a herald of his peace to
all those who sing with faith, ‘Glory to your power, O Lord\!’

You appeared as companion to Paul in struggles, glorious Saint, and
rightly were found worthy of the crowns of the kingdom. There you now
rejoice together and cry with one accord: Glory to your power, O Lord.

The Lord, finding the beauty of your mind radiating in beauty with
divine rays, appointed you as herald to those who sing with faith,
‘Glory to your power, O Lord\!’

****

Theotokion.

The Lord has put down the mighty from their thrones, as the Virgin and
Mother said; but he has filled with divine blessings the hungry who sing
with faith, ‘Glory to your power, O Lord\!’

****

Ode 5. Enlighten us.

Purified by the law of love from former stains, you received in your
heart, Luke, the spiritual light and shared it with all.

You were clearly revealed as ablaze with the lightning rays of grace,
All-blessed Luke, aflame with fiery tongue inspired.

You had longed to journey with wise Paul, for you were addressed as
beloved servant, O Evangelist of grace.

****

Theotokion.

Hail, truly the treasure house of virginity, the restoration of the
Foremother and the abolition of the curse of the Forefather.

****

Ode 6. I pour out my entreaty.

Having ascended to the mountain of the virtues, O Apostle, you conversed
with the beloved, and like Moses you received the twin tables written by
God inscribed by the finger of the Spirit, blessed Luke, teacher of the
inhabited world.

You enlightened the world by your teachings, as preacher of the revered
Church; for you were seen aflame with the beams of the uncreated
Trinity, O God-inspired, and you became as a star, shining as a torch on
the ends of the inhabited world.

Now, O inspired by God, you heal the diseases of souls as of old you did
those of bodies, entrusted with the gift from heaven and enriched with
grace of the Spirit. For Paul presents you as having becoming a
physician among martyrs.

****

Theotokion.

The Lord, as he is mighty, renewing my nature, regarded you and did
great things for you, as you said, O all-blameless who gave birth to
God. And he saved me from corruption through you, as he is God and loves
mankind.

****

Irmos.

I pour out my entreaty before the Lord, and I tell him all my
afflictions, for my soul has been filled with evils and my life has
drawn near to Hades. And like Jonas I beg you: O God, bring me up from
corruption.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

You became a Disciple of God the Word, and with Paul you brought the
whole earth to the light and dispelled the gloom by writing the divine
Gospel of Christ.

****

The Ikos.

As physician and beloved disciple, Luke, heal by mystical surgery the
passions of my soul and body, and grant me to be in good health in every
way, and to honour your all-revered festival with gladness; to drench
with showers of tears instead of sweet spices your revered and
all-honoured body; for as a for as a monument of life inscribed on the
wondrous church of the Apostles it cries out to all, just as you did of
old by writing the divine Gospel of Christ.

****

Synaxarion.

On the 18th day of the month, Commemoration of the holy Apostle and
Evangelist Luke.

****

Verses.  

Though at Emmaus I was held from sight  
Of you says Luke now, Christ, I see you plain.  
On the eighteenth of the month, the Evangelist Luke reached his life’s
end.

Luke, the great Evangelist, was from Antioch the Great in Syria, a
doctor by profession and outstandingly skilled in the art of painting.
While living and practising medicine at Thebes in Boeotia, he
encountered the holy Apostle Paul; and having come to believe in Christ
he abandoned his ancestral error. He then gave up the cure of bodies and
took up that of souls. At the suggestion of the holy Apostle Paul he
composed the Gospel according to him for one Theophilos, a Governor, who
had come to believe in Christ. After Paul had departed he taught all
Greece and, so they say, when he was eighty years old he went to his
rest in peace at Thebes in Boeotia. His body was laid to rest there, God
glorifying his own servant and worker by raining down little round
loaves or capsules upon his grave as a symbol of his skill. And
therefore his tomb became well known to all.

Constantius, the son of Constantine the Great, translated his remains
from Thebes through the grand Duke and martyr Artemios and enshrined
them in the church of the Holy Apostles under the holy table with Andrew
and Timothy.

They say that he was the first to paint the icon of the holy Mother of
God, carrying our Lord Jesus Christ in her arms, through the painter’s
medium of wax, and two others. These the great Apostle offered to the
Mother of the Lord, if it pleased her. She accepted them and said: ‘may
the grace of the One who was born from me be with them through me’.
Likewise he is said to have painted the holy icons of the holy Princes
of the Apostles. And from him this fair and devout and all-honoured work
was carried out into the whole inhabited world.

On the same day, Commemoration of the holy Martyr Marinos the elder.

****

Verses.  

Old error old Marinos now refutes,  
By daring young, and meets his end by sword.

On the same day, Commemoration of our Venerable Father Julian of the
Euphrates.

****

Verses.  

Now from the life which runs by like a dream  
With ready gladness Julian runs by.

Our father among the Saints Julian abandoned the world and went away to
the banks of the river Euphrates. There he found a cave in which he
lived the solitary life. Many enthusiasts flocked to his tiny cave and
setting up huts round about to the number of a hundred, nourished by
their proximity to the teacher. This wondrous man slew a dragon and made
water gush up in waterless land. He also went to mount Sinai and built a
church on the rock on which Moses the lawgiver had seen God, as far it
was possible to see him. This church is still standing today. But when
many people were fearing the return of the impious and apostate Julian
from the Persians, they asked his help, knowing him to be a true servant
of God. He prolonged his holy prayer until the tenth day and then heard
the words: ‘Not only for your sake, but because of the night-long
entreaties and supplications of many others, the foul and impious Julian
is being slain’.

After some years, when Meletios had been driven from Antioch, a number
of people appealed to this blessed man for the sake of his many prayers
and intercessions and entreaties. He agreed and set out, and on the way
he was received by a God-loving woman. When the Saint had sat down for
supper the woman’s only child, who was occupied at table, shortly
disappeared from sight and as it happened fell into the well. The noble
woman, though she knew this, remained absolutely unchanged, but rather
covered the well over and bravely continued serving. She deceived the
Saint when he asked where the child was by saying he had fallen ill.
When the Saint anxiously asked that the child come to the table and
enjoy a blessing, what had happened became known. He at once rose from
table and tearing the cover off the well saw the child jumping in the
water safe and sound, and as though in a game he ordered him to be
brought up by means of something that was to hand. When this had been
done the child was questioned and said he had come to no harm because he
had been buoyed up and supported by the old man who had spoken with him
and played with him in the waters.

When he reached Antioch he dwelt in the cave in which the holy Apostle
Paul had once hidden. Once when a large crowd had flocked to the cave
for the sake of the succour and blessing of the Saint, he was in the
grip of a violent fever, and was lying breathing weakly and almost at
his last breath. As they crowded round him, saying that there were many
people waiting outside and in need of blessing, he answered ‘If health
were good for us the Lord of all things would give it’; and after he had
prayed he raised himself from the raging fever for the sake of helping
the crowd.

Once when he was on a journey and was leaving for the royal court, some
one who lying sick on coming near his cloak arose at once and followed
him, as of old the lame man followed Peter and John. Not only this, but
when he had established him in the orthodox faith he returned to his
monastic training ground, making his way through Kyros. The people of
Kyros detained the Saint for his succour, saying: ‘Servant of God, in
place of our bishop we are expecting a certain Asterios, an impious and
destructive man. Stay with us and help us if you are able, lest with his
gossiping tongue he perverts us with his words. He stayed and when he
had completed an all-night prayer, with a few who had gathered, he slew
him with wrath sent by God, allowing him a life of pain of only one day.
Then he returned to his disciples and having passed a good number of
years with them he departed to the Lord.

Saint Mnason, bishop of Cyprus, and forty holy children met their end by
the sword.

Commemoration of the newly-revealed holy Martyrs Gabriel and Kyrmidoli
who contested in Egypt in 1522.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. The Hebrew Youths.

Ah, how the Master is made manifest from the tomb to Luke and Cleopas\!
For having risen he taught them to cry, ‘Blessed are you, Lord God to
the ages\!’

As you hastened on the path of life, blessed saint, you found the Word
journeying with you, opening the gates of heavenly tabernacles to you,
as you cry, ‘Blessed are you, O God, to the ages\!’

You were revealed, Luke, as a harp, voicing sweet melodies from God,
enlightening mortals as they cry, ‘Blessed are you, Lord God to the
ages\!’

****

Theotokion.

Hail Mary, Mother of God, the Bodiless Angel cried out you, O Virgin;
while with him we faithful cry to your Offspring: Blessed All-pure One,
the fruit of your womb.

****

Ode 8. The Lord, glorified on the holy mountain.

Having received your books as tables written by God, let us faithfully
delight in the illumination of grace, O all-blessed, as we praise the
Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages.

The Spirit having used your tongue as an instrument, enlightens mortals,
initiating them into the doctrines of grace as they praise the Lord and
highly exalt him to all the ages.

You were bound unshakeably with Paul, inspired Luke, and with the one
inspired by God you were shown revealed as an all-honoured pair, as you
both praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages.

With the net plaited by God of your words, herald of God, those held by
error you caught for the light of faith, as they praise the Lord and
highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Theotokion.

Revealed as a Prophetess, Elizabeth, bearing the Baptist and Forerunner,
proclaimed you Mother of the Lord, as she cried out: Praise the Lord and
highly exalt him to the ages.

****

Irmos.

The Lord, glorified on the holy mountain and who made known to Moses in
the bush by fire the mystery of the Virgin, praise and highly exalt to
all the ages.

****

Ode 9. You passed beyond the bounds.

You took your stand, Luke, as having reached the final goal of the
yearning for things desired, and you clearly met a blessed end, the
mirrors having being removed at the manifestations of the truth.

Having shone on the world like a sun, you stand inspired, all-praised
Luke, before the Trinity with Paul who saw God. With him, O revealer of
God, we unceasingly magnify you.

With your light-bearing radiance, Luke, entreat that those who sing your
praise may be made bright, and bestow peace on the world, all-blessed
Apostle who speak of God, that we may unceasingly magnify you.

Rejoicing you now stand, Luke, before the universal King, adorned with a
crown of divine majesty and beauty, therefore, O inspired of God, we
unceasingly magnify you.

****

Theotokion.

You received the Word who is without flesh as he wished to refashion my
nature, and when he had taken flesh you gave him birth. And so, Mother
of God, we unceasingly magnify you.

****

Irmos.

‘You passed beyond the bounds of nature when you conceived the Creator
and Lord; and you became a gate of salvation for the world. And so,
Mother of God, we unceasingly magnify you’.

****

Exapostilarion.

Luke, Apostle of Christ, initiate of ineffable mysteries, Teacher of the
nations, with godlike Paul and the pure Mother of God, whose godlike
icon you depicted from love, intercede on behalf of those who call you
blessed and who honour your sacred falling asleep, all-wise speaker of
mysteries who saw God.

****

Theotokion.

Sovereign Lady, Queen of all, go before in dangers, go before us in
afflictions, be with us in the constraints of the last day, do not let
Satan seize us, nor Hades, nor destruction; but may we stand without
guilt before the dread tribunal of your Son; for as pure Mother of God
you obtain whatever you will.

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Stichera and sing the following Prosomia.

Tone 1.

Believers, in hymns let us honour Christ’s Disciple, wise writer of the
Gospel, fair living imprint of the vessel of election, whose praise is
in all the Churches, Luke the Apostle. For he proclaimed the marvellous
wonders of God, enlightening those on earth with beams of theology
through grace.

Wise Apostle, having learnt the skill of healing souls above that of
bodies, infused with the wisdom of God you were revealed as outstanding
in both. By it you heal both souls and bodies, all-blessed Luke. Each
day you summon mortals to knowledge and give them wings towards the love
of God; you lead them up to heaven and you intercede for those who sing
your praise.

With a rational hook you drew to divine knowledge those who like fish
had sunk in the deep of ignorance, and you offered them to Christ as a
fair dish, all-blessed one; and they received outstanding honour: the
life that is unsullied and unending. So too you were named an Apostle of
Christ, wise Evangelist and writer of the works of Grace realised in
acts.

****

Then this Idiomel. Tone 8. By Leo Magister.

Come all creation, let us praise in songs the true spiritual physician
and Disciple of the Saviour, Luke the revered. For he healed the disease
of godlessness with the ointment of the baptismal font of Christ; and
from his mouth he has poured on living lands rivers of waters welling up
from God, the Gospel. Therefore his sound has out prophetically into the
inhabited world, and he intercedes that our souls may be saved.

Glory.

**Same Tone.**

Like David let us the faithful, gathered together, cry out in songs to
Luke the mystical orator of the Word: Your tongue has been revealed as a
pen of Christ the swiftly writing scribe, making fair the eyes of the
nations for the knowledge of divine understanding, by which you
proclaimed the Gospel and composed the Acts of your fellow Apostles. And
so, as you stand before God, the Trinity, intercede for our souls.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Sovereign Lady accept the supplications of your servants, and rescue us
from every constraint and affliction.

****

Great Doxology and Dismissal.

## 

AT THE LITURGY

****

Typika, and from the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Apostle.

Communion.

His sound has gone out into all the earth; and his words to the ends of
the world. Alleluia.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

