\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ Prophet Elias \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ [Akathist](akathist.md) \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

 

**Second Canon, whose acrostic is:**  
Give to me God’s grace, blessed Elias. Joseph.

**Ode 1. Tone 8.  
The wonder-working staff.**

As to the widow’s son, give life to my soul, which has become a corpse,
and make it bright with godly virtues, blessed Saint, guide it towards
life and make it a partaker of everlasting delight, longing to take
delight in you.

When you were born your father was initiated into a truly mighty wonder;
for he saw you, O blessed one, eating fire and being swaddled in flame.
Therefore by your intercessions deliver me from everlasting fire.

Made great by your inclinations towards God, O blessed one, you were
truly always greatly zealous for the Lord. Therefore empower me, once I
am filled with divine zeal, to do God’s will so that saved I may honour
you.

**Theotokion**

God who is beyond being was incarnate from you, O All-blameless, and for
us he appeared like us as man. Entreat him insistently, O All-pure, to
save me who have sinned more than all mankind and to deliver me from
punishment.

**Ode 3. O Lord, the builder.**

The priests of shame as enemies you slew, glorious Prophet, aflame with
zeal for God. Therefore I cry to you: Snatch me from the works of shame
and the everlasting fire.

I put you forward as intercessor before the mighty God, O blessed one,
able to save me from every evil. Be persuaded by my humble prayer and do
not despise me as I entreat you.

God, who brings all to pass, magnifies you, glorious Prophet Elias,
nourishing you of old through a bird. Beseech him to make me a partaker
of eternal delight and of the light to come.

**Theotokion**

Gate through which none may pass that leads to God, open to me I beg, O
Maiden, gates of repentance, cleansing me from the stain of sins with
showers of your mercy, O full of God’s grace.

**Ode 4. You, Lord, are my strength.**

God turned all your fiery zeal and sent you to nourish a widow, inspired
Elias, who by a woman’s threat had of old become a fugitive. And so I
implore you to nourish my hungry soul with divine gifts of grace.

Fierce clouds of sins cover me, billows of life buffet me and the
spirits of wickedness blow dreadfully against my soul. Prophet who speak
of God, become my pilot, directing me towards the haven of salvation.

Strength of soul, strength of body grant me, blessed Elias, by
entreating the Lord of glory who takes away the diseases of all; and
guide me safely to hasten through the stumbling blocks of life unharmed;
for I put you forward as my good defender.

**Theotokion**

All-blameless Lady, with all the heavenly Powers, with all the Prophets,
Athletes, Apostles and Holy Ones, intercede that I, who have greatly
sinned, main find salvation and be delivered from the punishment to
come.

**Ode 5. Why have you thrust me.**

Ablaze with the zeal of the faith you shut up the clouds that give birth
to rain; but, I beg you, Elias, by your sacred mediation water my soul,
melted by the flame of pleasures, with divine showers, and save me.

Shown forth as a priest, with guiltless hands you sacrificed the priests
of abominations who practised foul deeds; but I beg you, O Prophet,
guard me unharmed from every foul sin.

You were declared wonderful, O Prophet, blazing with godly invocations
you performed the sacrifices with faith; therefore I beg you
unceasingly: set alight in my heart the sacred love that burns up the
fuel of my passions.

**Theotokion**

The Word beyond being came down upon you like rain; entreat him,
all-blameless Maiden, to rain pure drops of compunction on me, that will
wash away every stain of my numberless evils.

**Ode 6. Be gracious to me, Saviour.**

Be gracious to me, Saviour, who have foolishly sinned greatly against
you, and ransom me from the punishment that awaits me in the world to
come, for you have great Elias and your most pure Mother entreating you.

As husbandman of purity keep me pure in soul; as zealous Elias fill my
mind with divine zeal, that I may beat off the assaults of wickedness.

You fasted with one food and accomplished a journey of forty days with
the help of God. Therefore I implore you: Empower me, O god-bearer, to
be master of every transgression.

**Theotokion**

O gate of God open for my humble soul divine entrances, by which I shall
enter with thanksgiving and receive release from evils, O Mother of God.

**Ode 7. God’s condescension.**

Taking pity on a people that was perishing, glorious Prophet, with zeal
of faith and godly invocations you brought down fire that consumed a
holy sacrifice. Therefore I implore you: deliver me from the eternal
flame and save me.

On mount Thabor you were counted worthy to see the face of God. Beseech
him, O Prophet, to overlook my sins and on the day of judgement with
soul uncondemned to contemplate his face.

As I journey on life’s road I take up many false paths. Elias, my loving
protector, with your protection pilot me, who am shaken by my own
inclination and assent to pleasures.

**Theotokion**

O All-praised, I hymn you and I magnify your pure child-bearing, O full
of God’s grace. Help me who am storm-tossed by the waves of life and
give to my humble soul compunction that cleanses from stains.

**Another. The Chaldean tyrant.**

We know you to have been a vessel that contained the Spirit of God; for
you, Elias, were an angel on earth who breathed the fire of divine zeal,
routed impiety, rebuked kings, anointed prophets and cut off the priests
of shame with the sword. And so we cry to you: Deliver us from shame to
come.

A chariot of fire took you from earth, Elias inspired by God, ablaze
with divine zeal; and so I implore you with the four-horsed chariot of
your virtues lighten my mind of the ills on earth; and entreat the God
and King of all things that I may reach the winning post in heaven.

With a living word you shut up heaven from giving rain; now with your
spiritual word open to me, I beg, the gates of repentance, holy Prophet,
sending to my soul showers of compunction, and save me as I cry out:
Priests bless, people highly exalt Christ to the ages.

**Of the Trinity.**

As we honour a Trinity in one Godhead, equal in strength, identical in
honour, consubstantial, equal in majesty, we honour Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, unsetting ray, might of equal kingship, and we sing with one
accord: Priests bless, people highly exalt the Lord to all the ages.

**Theotokion**

Born from you Emmanuel appeared framing laws of true religion and
teaching repentance. Most holy Lady now implore him to open for me gates
of righteousness and to save me as I cry out: Priests bless, people
highly exalt him to all the ages.

**Ode 9. Heaven was amazed.**

You were counted worthy to see God in a light breeze, as far it is
possible to see him, having before made your body light by an ascetic
life, glorious Prophet; therefore I implore you that, lightening the
grossness of my mind by your prayers, you would shine on me with divine
beams of repentance.

As of old you parted the Jordan with your mantle and crossed over, O
all-blessed, so dry up too the streams of my dreadful sins, sending to
my soul each day, Prophet who spoke of God, showers of tears, granting
me a torrent of delight.

From the many forms of stumbling blocks in life, from lawless foes,
every tribulation, bodily disease and perversion of soul, as a loving
protector, deliver me by your prayers, glorious Prophet, I cry out to
you and from eternal condemnation in Gehenna.

You were snatched up to the height, glorious Elias, leaving behind to
Elissaios when he asked double the grace of the Spirit. With him
ceaselessly beg victory from heaven and forgiveness of offences for our
Sovereign, made rich with you as unashamed protector with the Master.

**Theotokion**

As you are loving, do not despise the voices of your servants,
all-blameless Lady; but insistently beg the Master of all things, O
Virgin, to grant trophies of victory to our Sovereign, health of soul
and a share in and the splendour of God’s kingdom.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

