\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ [6 September](6_september.md) \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ [15 September](15_september.md) \] \[ 23 September \]
\[ [24 September](24sept.md) \] \[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

**The Conception of the honoured, glorious Prophet, Forerunner and
Baptist John.**

## AT VESPERS

**At Lord, I have cried,** **we insert 6 Stichera and sing Prosomia,
doubling them.**

**Tone 4. Called from the highest***.*

As godlike Zachary was serving as priest and was within the most sacred
temple and offering up the requests of the people to the Benefactor and
All-compassionate, he saw a godlike Angel, who cried out to him: Your
prayer and supplication have been heard. Courage, old man, and do not
disbelieve me. For you will have a child, a divine Forerunner, greater
than all those born of women, who will go before the Christ in the power
of Elias.

Strange you appear to me in aspect and manner, strange too in words and
tidings, answered Zachary. For I have come to ask salvation for the
people, not to gain a child, as you announce. I find you quite the
converse of my requests and I suspect that you may not speak the truth;
for how will what you say be confirmed? The members of Elizabeth are
deadened, and my own old age now counsels disbelief.

Why do you not believe my words, Zachary, saying that I bring good
tidings that are false? I am God’s Archangel. The things that I have
been ordered to, these I now tell as I stand here with you. But since
you have doubted and have not believed, you will be dumb and without
speech, until you see the divine outcome of my words. But when Elizabeth
bears you a child, the voice of the Word, the great Forerunner, your
tongue will be clear and you will bless the God of Israel.

Glory*.* **Tone 6. By Vyzantios.**

Today from a barren womb the fruit of prayer has sprouted, John the
Forerunner. Wilderness rejoice, humanity dance; the herald of repentance
begins to take flesh in his mother’s womb. Come rejoicing in his
glorious conception, lovers of feasts, let us dance as we cry out: You
are the greatest of those born of women; do not cease to intercede for
those who with faith honour your divine conception, that we may find
atonement for sins and God’s great mercy.

Both now*.* **Theotokion.**

Who will not call you blessed, All-holy Virgin? Who will not sing the
praise of your child-birth without labour? For the only-begotten Son,
who shone from the Father beyond time, came forth from you, pure Maiden,
ineffably incarnate. By nature he is God, by nature he became man for
our sake, not divided in a duality of persons, but known without
confusion in a duality of natures. O honoured and all-blessed, implore
him to have mercy on our souls.

**At the Aposticha, Prosomia. Tone 6. Having laid aside.**

As the holy priest and Prophet, went in holiness to the Holy of Holies,
a holy Angel stood by him, as it is written, and addressed him saying:
Your prayer has been heard, and now Elizabeth’s barrenness is being
abolished, and she will give birth for you, old man, to a son, John the
Forerunner, lamp of Elias, Prophet of the Most High and voice of the
Word who dawned from a Virgin, Child of God.

**Verse: And you child will be called the Prophet of the Most High, for
you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways.**

Tell me quite plainly, how shall I know this? the most blessed elder
answered the Angel. For, as you see, I am full of years; Elizabeth is
barren. How then do you utter words to me beyond nature? I am amazed.
Now I suspect that you are not speaking the truth at all, my friend.
Away with you, for I am beseeching the salvation of the people, not to
obtain a child, a thing hard to admit.

**Verse: To serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life.**

I am a Archangel of God Almighty, my name is Gabriel, said the Bodiless
One to the old man. Now be dumb and practise silence, for you have not
believed my words. But when your wife bears you a the trumpet of the
Word the Spirit will instruct your tongue and you will cry out most
clearly: You, child, will be called Prophet of the Most High, by grace
to prepare beforehand his paths, as he has been well pleased.

Glory. ** **Tone 6.**

An Angel you came forth from barren loins, O Baptist, from your
swaddling bands you dwelt in the wilderness and were declared seal of
all the Prophets, for you were counted worthy to baptize in Jordan the
One whom they had contemplated in divers manners and proclaimed
beforehand in riddles. And you heard the voice of the Father from heaven
bearing witness to his sonship; and you saw the Spirit in the form of a
dove drawing down the voice upon the One baptized. But, O higher than
all the Prophets, do not cease to intercede for us who celebrate with
faith your memorial.

Both now. ** **Theotokion.**

Mother of God, you are the true vine who gave bud to the fruit of life;
we implore you, Sovereign Lady, with the Forerunner and all the Saints,
that God may have mercy on our souls.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.**

Be glad, O barren one, who before did not bear child, for see, you have
conceived for the sun a lamp that is about to enlighten the whole
inhabited world, sick with blindness. Dance Zachary, cry aloud with
boldness: The one to be born is Prophet of the Most High\!

**Theotokion.**

The mystery hidden from all eternity and unknown to Angels, has been
revealed to those on earth through you, O Mother of God: God being made
flesh in a union without confusion, and willingly accepting the Cross
for us, through which he raised the first-formed man and saved our souls
from death.

## AT MATINS

**After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.**

**Tone 5. Let us believers praise.**

Elizabeth was freed from barrenness, while the Virgin remained still a
virgin, when at Gabriel’s voice each of them conceived in the womb; but
the Forerunner John leapt in the womb when he recognized beforehand his
God and Master incarnate in a virgin womb for our salvation

Glory. **The Same.**

Both now*.* **Theotokion. The same.**

Hail holy mountain on which God has walked; hail living bush and
unconsumed by fire; hail the world’s only bridge to God, who lead
mortals over to eternal life; hail Maiden undefiled, who bore without
wedlock the salvation of our souls.

**After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.**

**Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.**

The desert-loving dove, the sacred Baptist, who preached repentance and
revealed Christ become man, has been born, a patron for all who sin,
unfailingly helping all who are storm-tossed. At his entreaties, O
Christ, save your world.

Glory. **The Same.**

Both now. **Theotokion. The same.**

You alone bore the Maker of the universe, you alone adorned humanity by
your child-bearing, O Immaculate. Deliver me from the snares of crafty
Beliar, stand me on the rock of Christ’s wishes, as you insistently
entreat him to whom you gave a body.

**The Canons, one from the Oktoichos and one of the Saint.  
A composition of John of Damascus.**

**If you wish say also the Katavasias:  
**I will open my mouth.

**Ode 1. Tone 6. As on dry land.**

Shoot of a barren woman, pluck from my barren soul my fruitless thoughts
as I begin to praise your Conception in a barren womb.

When he entered the temple sacred Zachary saw a divine Angel who clearly
revealed to him: Priest, you will have a son in great old age, the
Forerunner.

The brilliant lamp of the glory of Elias, the great Forerunner, begins
to shine in his mother’s womb. Through him the darkness of passions and
the bonds of sterility have been loosed.

**Theotokion.**

Seeing the Master being carried in your womb, all-pure Mother of God,
John, as his Forerunner, clearly leapt for joy in his mother’s womb.

**Ode 3. None is holy.**

The barren woman today conceives a sacred fruit, which afterwards is
going by grace to cut out with the spiritual axe all fruitlessness of
souls.

Struck dumb within the temple, great Zachary by a fearful message
acquires the voice of the Word, and radiantly magnifies the
compassionate Lord.

The glorious Forerunner, who showed to all the safe path of repentance,
sprouts in his mother’s womb at the behest of the Angel by divine
counsel and beyond hope.

**Theotokion.**

As he recognised Christ being carried in the womb of the Virgin, the
issue of a barren woman leapt, foretelling the joy that had come to
dwell on earth to ransom all from despair.

**The Irmos.**

’None is holy but you, O Lord my God, who exalt the horn of your
faithful, O Good One, and establish us on the rock of your confession.’

**Kathisma. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.**

To Zachary the priest, as he offered incense in the temple, Gabriel
appeared from heaven and said to him: In old age you will have a
glorious fruit, and Elizabeth’s former barrenness and infertile lack of
offspring will be at once unloosed, and she will conceive and bear the
herald and Forerunner of Jesus. At their intercessions, Saviour of the
world, save our souls.

Glory. Both now. ** **Theotokion.**

Joseph was amazed as he contemplated what was beyond nature, and at your
conceiving without seed, Mother of God, he called to mind the shower on
the fleece, the bush unburned by fire, Aaron’s rod that blossomed. And
your betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried to the priests: A
Virgin bears a child and after childbirth remains still a Virgin.

**Ode 4. Christ my power.**

The voice of an Angel sacredly announced beforehand to the priest that
you would spring from a barren womb as truly the messenger of Christ’s
coming, blest Forerunner.

Before you were childless and did not give birth, now rejoice, O barren
one, because full of all praise you will bear fruit, Christ’s Baptist
and Forerunner, wondrous Elizabeth

With the axe of your supplication, O Forerunner, pluck out the thorns of
my passions and the stumbling blocks of my thoughts, and make my mind
fruitful with virtues, O all-blessed.

**Theotokion.**

The womb of the Virgin was carrying you who carry the universe, when the
Baptist, being carried in the womb, worshipped you, O Christ, and leaped
rejoicing.

**Ode 5. By your divine light.**

To the Prophet, as he was entering the Sanctuary and offering the
service according to the law to the Maker, a holy Angel appeared,
announcing the divine conception of the Forerunner.

How will this be to me more clearly? For I an old man, as you see, and I
have a barren wife, said Zachary to the Archangel, the words you speak
to me are contrary to nature.

Look to Abraham’s Sara; see how she gave birth to Isaac in old age, my
friend, and fittingly believe what is said, the great Angel answered the
old man.

**Theotokion.**

Blessed are you among women, O full of God’s grace, Elizabeth cried out
to you, because I know that you bear in your womb without man and alone
remain incorrupt after childbirth.

**Ode 6. As I watch the sea of life.**

My mind is full of doubt and I do not believe your words, the priest
said to the Archangel; for I asked salvation for the people, not fruit
from my loins.

The Fashioner of nature, King of the Angels, replied the minister, has
been well-pleased for you to beget the Messenger of his coming; do not
disbelieve my words, my friend.

Your form is of fire, your appearance terrifying and your word wondrous,
said Zachary to the minister; but yet I do not believe you as you speak
strange words beyond nature.

**Theotokion.**

The lamp, recognizing the Sun hidden in the cloud of his mother’s womb,
himself in the sombre dwelling of the womb, rejoicing worshipped him and
leapt for joy.

**The Irmos.**

’As I watch the sea of life rising with the storm of temptations, I
hasten to your fair haven and cry out to you: Bring my life up from
corruption, O most merciful’

**Kontakion. Tone 1. The angelic Choir.**

Great Zachary with far-famed Elizabeth his wife is radiantly glad, for
worthily she conceives John the Forerunner, of whom an Archangel brought
the good tidings rejoicing, and whom we humans fittingly honour as an
initiate of grace.

**The Ikos.**

Let us open the sacred Gospel, which holy and wondrous Luke wrote for
us, and let us contemplate the radiant and notable conception of the
Forerunner. For, he says, when the Elder and righteous Zachary entered
the Holy of Holies to offer incense at the moment of the daily service,
Gabriel appeared to him brining good tidings and saying: You have a son,
Hierarch, in your old age, the Prophet and Forerunner, voice and herald,
ever-lighted lamp and initiate of grace.

**Synaxarion**

On the 23rd of the same month, the Conception of the holy and glorious
Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John.

**Verses***  
*Archangel’s message to a Prophet was:  
Prophet you will beget and more than that.

The godlike Chief Captain Gabriel brought the good tidings of this
divine conception to the prophet and priest Zachary. ’Your supplication
has been heard’ he said; so from this he foretold, by reason of the
marvel of the old age and barrenness of Elizabeth, the divine and
virginal child-bearing of the immaculate Mother of God.

On the same day, Commemoration of the holy Martyrs Andrew, John, Peter
and Antony, who attained perfection in Africa.

**Verses***  
*For the Word’s sake, of old pierced with one lance,  
Andrew endured being pierced by lances twain.

Error John made his foe and being slain  
Slaughtered the foe and with him error too.

Peter and Antony like solid rocks \[petrai\]  
Stoutly endured their rending limb from limb.

On the same day, Commemoration of the holy Virgin Martyr Raïs.

**Verses***  
*Longing to see God’s beauty Raïs gave  
The beauty of her flesh up to the sword.

On the same day, Commemoration of the Venerable women Xanthippe and
Polyxena, sisters by blood.

**Verses***  
*To be their fellows Angel choirs now take  
Xanthippe and Polyxena her kin.

On the same day the holy new martyr Nicolas the grocer, who was martyred
in Constantinople in 1672 and died by the sword.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

**Ode 7. The Angel made the furnace like dew.**

As you have not believed my words receive dumbness for all to see; and
when you see the voice of the Word being brought to birth, receive your
voice again, crying out: Blessed are you, the God of Israel.

United to the moon, Elizabeth, Zachary, shining brightly like the sun,
begot the resplendent lamp of the light which shines for us who are
dreadfully held fast in the darkness of the passions.

Using his leapings as words, Christ’s great Prophet worshipped you in
the Virgin’s womb, carried himself in Elizabeth’s womb, O Jesu, God of
our Fathers.

**Theotokion.**

The moon, Elizabeth, carrying within her a divine star, the Forerunner,
worshipped Mary, the cloud of light, who bore the Sun, Christ, incarnate
of you to save us.

**Ode 8. You poured dew from the flame.**

The friend of the Bridegroom is being made ready, the voice of the Word
begins to be, and is nourished by barren loins, he the great soldier of
the universal King.

A husbandman has flowered for barren hearts, the axe of the passions is
already being forged, the august calf is being fattened by self-mastery,
the great Forerunner. Peoples rejoice.

As of old you loosed the bonds of sterility, O Baptist, so loose the
stiffness of my mind and make me sprout with fruits of repentance and
live to the ages.

**Theotokion***.*

As Elizabeth contemplated you, O Maiden, bearing child, inspired by God
she rejoiced, while the unborn child within her leapt as he recognized
his Master.

**Irmos.**

’You poured dew from the flame for the Holy Youths and the Just
Prophet’s sacrifice you burned up with water, for you do all things, O
Christ, by your will alone. We highly exalt you to all the ages.’

**Ode 9. No human can see God.**

The great and godlike Forerunner of Christ, having now opened the
sterile gates, dwells in his mother’s womb as in a palace. Like a
soldier he will come forth ahead of the universal King to prepare his
ways.

Prophet of God, old man, dance, you will have a son, than whom no
greater among mortals has arisen, John the Lord’s Forerunner. Elizabeth,
leap for joy; all the earth be glad as you bring your praise to God the
Maker of all things.

As we sing your praise with faith, now remember us, Prophet and
Forerunner of the Lord, rescuing us from passions of the soul, saving us
from dangers and in a manner fitting God guiding us to heaven’s path, O
ever-blessed.

**Theotokion.**

Elizabeth recognised you, pure Mother, when she perceived that she
herself had been loosed from sterile bonds, and that she was carrying in
her womb the Forerunner of the One who made his dwelling in your womb, O
immaculate Virgin, Mary full of God’s grace.

’It is impossible for humans to see God, on whom the ranks of Angels
dare not gaze. But through you, All-pure one, the incarnate Word has
been seen by mortals. As we magnify Him, with the heavenly armies we
call you blessed.’

**Exapostilarion. With the Disciples let us go.**

The glorious conception of the Forerunner foretells the King who is to
be born of a Virgin, as he from the fruitless and barren Elizabeth and
the old man and priest, the famous Zachary. At their prayers and those
of the Mother of God and John your Baptist, Lord, save and take pity on
us all.

**Theotokion. Same melody.**

With one accord, O all-pure, we who have been redeemed from the ancient
curse through your divine child-bearing, cry out to you the ’Hail’ of
the august Archangel: Hail, redemption of Adam, Virgin Mother of God.
Hail, honoured one, through whom we have been delivered from death.
Hail, through whom we have found the kingdom of heaven.

**At Lauds, Prosomia.  
Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.**

Creation rejoices at your conception, Forerunner and Prophet, Baptist
John; for your divine birth is a sign for us of the Master’s nativity;
and therefore we who are upon earth with one accord as is fitting sing
your praise. (**Twice)**

The Angel, having found as a wondrous testimony the conception by the
barren woman, brings it to Mary, offering it as confirmation. And so let
us also sing the praise of Elizabeth, once childless, and Zachary her
spouse and John.

The lamp prepared by God of the eternal light, the friend of the
Bridegroom, the great Morning Star of the Sun of glory, the living voice
of God the Word, the Forerunner of the coming of the Lord is now
conceived at the message of an Angel.

Glory. Both now*.* **Tone 6.**

Elizabeth conceived the Forerunner of grace, the Virgin the Lord of
glory. The mothers greeted one another and the infant leapt for joy. For
within the slave was praising the Master. Marvelling the mother of the
Forerunner began to cry aloud: Whence is this to me, that the Mother of
my Lord should come to me? That he, who alone has great mercy, may save
a people in despair.

**Great Doxology and Dismissal.**

**At the Liturgy, Typika and from the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Canon
etc.**

**Communion.**  
The just will be held in eternal memory.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

