\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ [6 September](6_september.md) \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ [15 September](15_september.md) \] \[ [23 September](23sept.md) \]
\[ [24 September](24sept.md) \] \[ 26 September \]

# 

# ON THE 26TH OF SAME MONTH

The Translation of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostle and
Theologian, John the Evangelist.

### 

## AT GREAT VESPERS

After the Opening Psalm the 1st Section of Blessed is the man. At Lord,
I have cried we insert 6 stichera \[8 if there is a Vigil\], and we sing
the 3 following prosomia, doubling them.

Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

The one who saw ineffable revelations,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) the interpreter of
God’s mysteries on high, the child of Zebedee, in writing for us
Christ’s Gospel, taught us to contemplate the Father, the Son and the
Spirit.

The lyre of heavenly songs, struck by God, this mystic writer, mouth
inspired by God, sweetly sings the song of songs,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) moving
his lips like strings and striking with his tongue like a plectrum, and
intercedes that we may be saved.

Beloved of God, giving utterance with your tongue, which sounds as the
thunder,[\[3\]](#_ftn3) to the hidden word of the wisdom of God, aptly
opening your lips, you ever cry aloud, ‘In the beginning was the
Word’,[\[4\]](#_ftn4) and with your torch you guide
everyone[\[5\]](#_ftn5) to knowledge of God.

Glory. Tone 2.  
By Germanos (Some say by Vyzantios)**

Race of mortals, let us, as is fitting, praise the son of
thunder,[\[6\]](#_ftn6) the foundation of divine words, the prince of
theology and foremost herald of the true wisdom of the doctrines of God,
John the beloved and virgin; for he had the divine unceasingly in
himself and said, ‘In the beginning the Word’[\[7\]](#_ftn7), and again
that he is inseparably with the Father, and after this that he is equal
in being with the Fa­ther,[\[8\]](#_ftn8) showing us through him the
right belief of the Holy Trinity. He showed us that he is creator with
the Father, and the one who bears life and true light.[\[9\]](#_ftn9) O
ecstatic wonder and astounding fact\! Because being full of love he
became also full of theology, by glory and honour and faith being a
foundation of our in­violate faith; through which ,may we obtain the
eternal good things on the day of judgement.

Both now. Theotokion. Same Tone.

The shadow of the law[\[10\]](#_ftn10) has passed away now that grace
has come, for as the Bush in flames was not burned,[\[11\]](#_ftn11) so
as a virgin you bore a child and remained a virgin; instead of a pillar
of fire[\[12\]](#_ftn12) the Sun of justice[\[13\]](#_ftn13) has dawned,
instead of Moses Christ, the salvation of our souls.

Entrance, O Joyful Light, the Prokeimenon of the day and the Readings.

The reading is from the 1st Epistle General of John.  
(3,21-24; 4,1-6)

Beloved, if our heart does not condemn us we have freedom to speak
before God. And whatever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his
commandments and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. And
this is his commandment: that we should believe in the name of his Son
Jesus Christ and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And one
who keeps his commandments abides in him and he in them. And by this we
know that he abides in us, from the Spirit of which he has given us.
Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits, whether they
are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world. By
this you know the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ has come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that does not
confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God. And this
is the spirit of the Antichrist, which you have heard is coming, and is
now already in the world. You are of God, little children, and have
overcome them, because he who is in you is greater than he who is in the
world. They are of the world. Therefore they speak as of the world, and
the world hears them. We are of God. He who knows God hears us; he who
is not of God does not hear us.

The reading is from the 1st Epistle General of John.  
(4,11-16)

Beloved, if God so loved us, we also ought to love one another. No one
has ever seen God. If we love another, God abides in us, and his love
has been perfected in us. By this we know that we abide in him, and he
in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and
witness that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world.
Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in them, and
they in God. And we have known and have believed the love which God has
for us. God is love, and one who abides in love abides in God, and God
in them.

The reading is from the 1st Epistle General of John.  
(4,20-21; 5,1-5)**

Beloved, anyone who says, ‘I love God,’ and hates their brother, is a
liar; for one who does not love the brother whom they have seen, how can
they love God whom they have not seen? And this commandment we have from
him: that one who loves God must love their brother also. Everyone who
believes that Jesus is the Christ has been born of God, and everyone who
loves the one who has begotten loves also the one who has been begotten
of him. By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God and keep his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep
his com­mandments. And his command­ments are not heavy. Because
everything that has been born of God conquers the world. And this is the
victory that has conquered the world, our faith. Who is the one who
conquers the world, if not the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of
God?

At the Liti, Idiomel stichera.  
Tone 1. By Germanos.**

Rivers of theology poured from your honoured mouth, O Apostle, watered
from which the Church of God worships with right belief the
consubstantial Trinity; whom, O Theologian John, now ask that our souls
may be saved.

Same Tone. By Andrew of Pyros.

The plant of purity, the myrrh of sweet fragrance has dawned for us
again at this present Feast. Cry out to him, ‘You leant on the Master’s
breast[\[14\]](#_ftn14) and rained down the word on the world, Apostle
John, who guarded the Virgin as the apple of your eye. Ask of Christ for
us his great mercy’.

Same Tone.

Disciple of the Saviour, Virgin and Theologian, to you, as virgin,
Christ our God, hanging on the Cross, entrusted the Virgin and Mother of
God, and you guarded her as the apple of your eye.[\[15\]](#_ftn15)
Therefore intercede that our souls may be saved.

Same Tone.

As eye-witness of ineffable mysteries you cried out and loudly
proclaimed that the eternal Word was in the beginning with God and that
he was God,[\[16\]](#_ftn16) O Apostle John, bosom and true friend of
Christ, sweetness of the Trinity, unshakeable buttress of Ephesus and
Patmos and our help. Intercede, all-blessed Theologian, that  the people
that ever faithfully celebrates your memory may be delivered from
impious foes, both physical and spiritual.

Tone 2. By Theophanes.

The summit of the Apostles, the trumpet of theology, the spiritual
general, who made the whole inhabited world subject to God, come
believers, let us call him blessed, revered John, translated from earth,
yet not withdrawn from earth, but living and abiding the fearful second
coming of the Master. O mystic bosom friend of Christ, ask that we, who
celebrate your memory with love, may meet it uncondemned.

Glory. Tone 4. By Vyzantios.

As you leant on the breast of the Teacher Christ at the Lord’s
supper,[\[17\]](#_ftn17) beloved Disciple, you learnt there ineffable
things, and you thundered to all the heavenly utterance: In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God and the Word was God;
the true light that enlightens every one who comes into the
world,[\[18\]](#_ftn18) Christ God, and the Saviour of our souls.

Both now. Theotokion.

The Son, who with the Father and the Spirit is glorified in the highest
by the Cherubim, wishing to refashion the first fashioned man, emptied
himself wholly and ineffably in your womb, all-praised Mother of God,
and dawning from you, he enlightened the whole world with his Godhead,
delivering it from the folly of idols, and, making humanity divine in
himself, he joined it to heaven, Christ our God, and the Saviour of our
souls.

At the Aposticha, Prosomia.  
Tone 4. Called from the highest.

Having contemplated the Son of the Most High, co-eternal and
consubstantial with the Father, unchanging light from
light[\[19\]](#_ftn19) and express imprint of the person of the
Begetter,[\[20\]](#_ftn20) who shone forth from him beyond time and
impassibly, the Creator and Lord of all ages, you proclaimed him,
Beloved Disciple, to the world, Christ our God, who brings light out of
darkness.[\[21\]](#_ftn21) Implore him to save and enlighten our souls.

Verse: His sound has gone out into all the earth; and his words to the
end of the world.[\[22\]](#_ftn22)

Taken into the light of the Paraclete and enlightened by it, you
contemplated the One who proceeds from the Father,[\[23\]](#_ftn23)
while being revealed to humanity through the Son, as the same in honour,
in majesty and being, whom with the Father who has no beginning and the
divine Word you preached to all, Beloved Disciple. Therefore in hymns we
honour you as a godly foundation of the faith. Keep it unshaken by your
prayers to the Lord.

Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims
the work of his hands.[\[24\]](#_ftn24)

Ascending the heights of theology, you were initiated into the ineffable
mysteries of God: one being of the Godhead, and one glory and kingship
and lordship, separated in three persons, inseparable in being and
united in an unconfused divine unity. Giving glory in this way, O
Theologian, you proclaimed an undivided Trinity. Implore that undivided
Trinity to save and enlighten our souls.

Glory. Tone 6. By Monk John.

Apostle of Christ, Evangelist, Theologian, you became an initiate of
ineffable mysteries and thundered out to us the ineffable doc­trines of
wisdom, making clear to believers that: In the beginning he
was.[\[25\]](#_ftn25) And, rejecting the: He was not,[\[26\]](#_ftn26)
you refuted the words of the heretics, revealed as bosom and beloved
friend, as mighty-voiced Isaias and Moses who saw God.[\[27\]](#_ftn27)
As you have freedom to speak before God, implore him insistently on
behalf of our souls.

Both now. Theotokion.

My Maker and Redeemer, Christ the Lord, coming forth from your womb, O
All-pure, clothed himself in me and freed Adam from the former
curse;[\[28\]](#_ftn28) and so, never silent, we all cry out to you as
truly Mother of God and Virgin the Angel’s, ‘Hail\!’[\[29\]](#_ftn29)
Hail, Lady, shelter and pro­tection and salvation of our souls.

Apolytikion. Tone 2.

Beloved Apostle of Christ our God, hasten, deliver a people without
defence. As he accepted that you lean upon his breast,[\[30\]](#_ftn30)
he accepts you as you fall before him. Implore him, O Theologian, and
scatter the persistent cloud of nations, asking for us peace and his
great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

All your mysteries are beyond understanding, all beyond glory, O Mother
of God; sealed in purity and guarded in virginity you were recognised to
be truly a Mother, in giving birth to the true God: im­plore him that
our souls may be saved.

And Dismissal.

## AT MATINS

**After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.**

**Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.**

You were named son of divine thunder,[\[31\]](#_ftn31) for you deafened
the ears of the impious, and more sweetly than a trumpet you made the
incarnation of the Word sound in upright hearts. As a true friend you
leant on his breast;[\[32\]](#_ftn32) from which you drew out the deep
of knowledge, all-wise Apostle John, and proclaimed to all the One who
is with the Father without beginning. Intercede with Christ God to
bestow forgiveness of faults on those who celebrate with love your holy
memory.

**Theotokion.**

The Wisdom and Word you conceived in your womb, O Mother of God, and you
bore for the world him who possesses the world, and you held in your
arms him who holds all things and nourishes all, the Fashioner of
nature; therefore I implore you, All-holy Virgin, that, when I am about
to stand before the face of my Creator, I may be delivered from my
faults. Sovereign Lady, pure Virgin, then bestow on me your help; for
you are able to do whatever you wish, O all-praised.

**After the 2nd reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.**

**Same melody.**

Having abandoned the deep of fishing, O all-praised, you caught all the
na­tions like fishes with the rod of the Cross; for as Christ had said
to you, you were named a fisher of men,[\[33\]](#_ftn33) catching them
for true religion; therefore you sowed the knowledge of the Word of God
and made Patmos and Ephesus fruitful by your words. Theologian, Apostle,
intercede with Christ God to bestow forgiveness of faults on those who
feast with love your holy memory.

**Theotokion.**

I consider the judgement and I quail, for, wretch that I am, I have done
deeds of shame, and I ask, all-praised Mother of God: Before the night
of death overtakes me, turn me back, guiding me to the way of
repentance, that with thanksgiving I may worship and hymn your
measureless power and your divine assistance, All-holy Bride of God, as
you in­tercede with Christ God for what I ask of you: that there may be
given me pardon of sins and his great mercy.

Selection at the Polyeleos.

The firmament. Alleluia.

The heavens declare the glory of God, and  the firmament proclaims the
work of his hands.

The heavens will confess your wonders, O Lord.

Instead of your fathers your sons have been born.

You will establish them as rulers over all the earth.

For God’s mighty men of the earth are greatly exalted.

The God of gods has spoken and summoned the earth.

From the rising of the sun to its setting, praised be the name of the
Lord.

His lightnings have lit up the world.

And the heavens have proclaimed his justice.

And all the peoples have seen his glory.

Rulers of Juda are their leaders.

Rulers of Zaboulon rulers of Nephalim.

God has reigned over the nations.

God is glorified in the assembly of the saints.

Great and terrible he is to all those round about him.

Offer to the Lord families of nations,

Offer to the Lord glory and honour.

Proclaim his glory among the nations.

Say among the nations that the Lord is king.

Their sound has gone out into all the earth, and their words to the ends
of the world.

He has put in them the words of his lips.

And he gave them countries of nations, and they inherited labours of
peoples.

God has stood in the assembly of gods, in the midst he will judge gods.

Offer to the Lord, sons of God, offer to the Lord glory to his name.

He has subdued peoples to us, and nations beneath our feet.

Great is our God, and great his strength.

He will give power and might to his people. Blessed be God.

Glory.

Let us worship the Father, and let us glorify the Son, and let us all
praise together the all holy Spirit, crying out and saying: All holy
Trinity, save us all.

Both now.

Your people, O Christ, brings your Mother to intercede; at her
entreaties grant us your pity, O Good one, that we may glorify you, who
dawned for us from the grave.

**After the Polyeleos, Kathisma. Same melody.**

Leaning on Jesus’ breast, gaining boldness as a disciple, you asked,
‘Who is your betrayer, Lord?’ And as to one beloved, glorious Apostle,
he was clearly shown to you through the bread.[\[34\]](#_ftn34)
Therefore too, as an initiate of ineffable things, you teach the ends of
the earth the incarnation of the Word. Theologian, Apostle, intercede
with Christ God to bestow forgiveness of faults on those who feast with
love your holy memory.

**Theotokion.**

All-holy Virgin, Mother of God, heal, I beg, the dreadful passions of my
soul, and grant me pardon of my faults, which I have senselessly
committed, fouling my soul and body, wretch that I am. Alas\! what shall
I do in that hour when the Angels separate my soul from my wretched
body? Then, Lady, be my help and fervent protector; for I, your servant,
have you as my hope.

**The Anavathmi, the 1st Antiphon of Tone 4.**

**Prokeimenon, Tone 4.**

His sound has gone out into all the earth; and his words to the ends of
the world.

Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament proclaims
the work of his hands.

Let everything that has breath. The 11th Eothinon. Psalm 50.

Glory.

At the prayers of the Apostle, O Merciful One, blot out the multitude of
my transgressions.

Both now.

At the prayers of the Mother of God, O Merciful One, blot out the
multitude of my trans­gressions.

Have mercy one me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy and in
accordance with the multitude of your compassion blot out the multitude
of my transgressions.

**Then the Idiomel. Tone 2.**

Theologian, Virgin, beloved Disciple of the Saviour, by your
in­tercessions save us, we implore, from every kind of harm; for we are
your flock.

The Canons, of the Mother of God, and two of the Apostle.

Canon of the Mother of God,  
of which the acrostic is the Alphabet in reverse order.  
By Theophanes.

**Ode 1. Tone 2. The Irmos.**

His overwhelming power once smothered in the deep all Pharao’s host;
while the incarnate Word, the glorified Lord, has wiped out malignant
sin: for he has been greatly glorified.[\[35\]](#_ftn35)

**Troparia**

**Y**ou it was that God chose among women as lovely, as most fair, as
wholly unblemished, and he dwelt in your unblemished womb; implore him,
all-blameless one, that from the blemish of offences those who sing your
praise may be delivered.

 

**W**hile, in the words of the psalm, you stand, pure Virgin, as Queen
on the right-hand of the King[\[36\]](#_ftn36) who shone forth from your
womb, be­seech him to make me stand at his right hand on the day of
recompense,[\[37\]](#_ftn37) O Bride of God.

**V**irgin, you wholly renewed the nature of mortals, dried up by every
offence, in giving birth to the heavenly rain. But, I beg, show the
dried up furrow of my soul to be fruitful, O Bride of God.

**Canon of the Saint, of which the acrostic is:  
**I shall praise the son of thunder in a way pleasing to Christ.

**By Theophanes.  
Ode 1. Tone 2. Same Irmos.**

Having received the kingdom of heaven which you proclaimed, blessed
Saint, and become a heavenly companion to the Word, by your entreaties
guard those who believe your honoured proclamation and theology.

Displaying robust thought you despised everything on earth and the bonds
of nature and, linked with the Word in reason and mind, All-wise
Apostle, you freed from their unreason those subject to unreason.

Having received knowledge of heavenly things, with true theology you
proclaimed God the Word of God, in your gospel, O all-wise, proclaiming:
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with his Begetter and
the Word was God.[\[38\]](#_ftn38)

**Theotokion.**

The choir of godly maidens, greatly inspired, sing of you as beautiful
among women, O Lady Mother of God, made lovely with the beauties of the
Godhead; for beyond reason you bore the Word who creates beauty.

**A second Canon of the Saint, of which the acrostic is:  
**I bring to God’s Initiate a sixth plea. Joseph.

**Ode 1. Tone 6.  
Crossing the sea as on dry land.**

Illumined in thought, you bent down into the deeps of the Spirit and
made clear to us the dread begetting, crying out: In the beginning was
the Word of God.[\[39\]](#_ftn39)

Bowed down by a multitude of temptations, passions and tribulations, and
by assaults of evils, with faith we flee to you for refuge, O
Theologian: be a helper to your servants.

Rescue us from eternal condemnation and fire, healing the dreadful
passions of our souls, as best of physicians, O wise Apostle, by your
mediation.

**Theotokion.**

On the day of judgement, Pure Virgin, who conceived the God who for our
sake became man, ask him to take pity on us, who have sinned much
against him.

**Katavasia**

I will open my mouth and it will be filled with the Spirit, and I will
utter a word to the Queen and Mother,[\[40\]](#_ftn40) and I shall be
seen keeping glad festival, and rejoicing I will sing her wonders.

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 3. Irmos.**

The desert, the barren Church from the nations, flowered like a lily at
your coming, Lord, by which my heart has been established.

**Troparia**

**U**sing me, humanity, as clothing, the Maker comes forth from you,
All-blameless, and bestows a robe of incorruption on the many stripped
naked by offences.

**T**o God the Word supreme in honour you gave birth, O Lady; implore
him insistently to take pity on my lowly soul, saddened by the
dishonours of pleasures.

**S**taunch the wounds of my soul, O Immaculate; preserve with your
powerful medicine my lowly heart, poisoned by the venom of the serpent.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

With your theologian’s tongue, John blessed by God, you revealed the
mystery beyond understanding of the Trinity, by which my heart has been
established.[\[41\]](#_ftn41)

Your tongue became the pen of a scribe,[\[42\]](#_ftn42) the All-holy
Spirit, writing for God as it recorded the honoured and divine Gospel.

I shall sing the praise of your deep of wisdom, O All-wise, who with
boldness leant[\[43\]](#_ftn43) on the inspired source of wisdom and
were named his herald.

**Theotokion.**

We honour you, All-blameless, the only Virgin and Mother, who became for
us the agent of salvation and who deliver the world by your prayers.

**Another Irmos. None is holy.**

With bright and pure mind, thrice-blessed Theologian, you spoke with the
Word, were initiated by him with things clearly beyond reason and you
enlightened all creation.

Deliver me from harsh bonds of sin, O Thrice-blessed, binding me to the
love of the Master and God, whom you loved fervently and were named his
Theologian.

You have been given us as champion, mediator, deliverer and intercessor
with the Lord, as worker of marvels and source of healings, O
Theologian; therefore we honour you.

**Theotokion.**

O Mother of God, when the Word who took flesh ineffably from you, was
raised up on the tree of the Cross, he entrusted you, as Virgin Maiden,
to the virgin Disciple.[\[44\]](#_ftn44)

**Katavasia.**

O Mother of God, as living and ungrudging source, establish those united
in spiritual fellowship who sing hymns you of praise, and in your divine
glory grant them crowns of glory.

**Kathisma. Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.**

Leaning on Wisdom’s breast[\[45\]](#_ftn45) and learning knowledge from
the Word, with inspiration you thundered: In the beginning was the
Word;[\[46\]](#_ftn46) being the first fairly to write of the begetting
without beginning and to announce to all the incarnation of the Word;
therefore too with your tongue you caught the nations in a net and you
teach the ends of the earth the grace of the Holy Spirit. Theologian,
Apostle, intercede with Christ God to bestow forgiveness of faults on
those who feast with love your holy memory.

**Theotokion.**

As you bore the merciful and compassionate Word, Sovereign Lady of all,
have mercy on all those who flee to you for refuge, free them from
temptations and diseases, from every evil and from the eternal flame;
that with thanksgiving we may glorify the wealth of your manifold
compassion and your measureless mercy, and may always cry out to you:
Intercede with Christ our God to bestow forgiveness of faults on those
who fittingly hymn your child-bearing, O Immaculate.

**Ode 4. The Irmos.**

You came from a Virgin, not an ambassador, not an Angel, but the Lord
himself incarnate, and saved me, humanity, entirely; therefore I cry to
you: Glory to your power, O Lord\![\[47\]](#_ftn47)

**Troparia**

**R**ain down on me, Lady, a drop of compunction, to remove all the
burning heat of my heart and stem the harmful floods of my despondency.

**Q**ueen immaculate, do not despise me, struck by the sword of pleasure
and lying wounded; but heal me with the lance and blood of your Son and
our God who was crucified.

**P**ure Virgin, enriched with the sovereignty of all creation, make me,
who am utterly beggared, worthy of divine grace, that I may magnify you
as my loving protectress.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

Fittingly the Word declared you a theologian, O most excellent, for he
initiated you into his Godhead and taught you the ineffable dispensation
as man.

Having gained a mind inspired by God and a virgin body, most sacred and
glorious Apostle, you were named a living and animate temple and
dwelling of the all-hymned Trinity.

Blessed Virgin, you were hon­oured with sonship of the Immaculate
Virgin, were declared brother of the one who chose you for himself and
perfected you as disciple and theologian.

**Theotokion.**

To heal the ancient transgression of Eve, he who is above all Godhead,
dwelt in you, O all-blameless and all-holy, and re-formed me, humanity,
entirely.

**Another. O Christ my power.**

Drops of the Word, glorious Apostle, you used to water the whole face of
the earth and devoutly dried up the muddy waters of impiety; therefore
we honour you.

Strength and might gird about my soul, which weakened by varied attacks
of unclean enemies, All-wise Apostle, flees to your protection.

In that you have become a temple of the divine Spirit, O Theologian,
make those who in faith continually attend your divine temple, temples
of God by your mediation.

**Theotokion.**

Now let us openly hymn the divine enclosure of God, the Holy Virgin, let
us all, made divine through her and ransomed from troubles, call her
blessed.

**Katavasia.**

The Prophet Avvakoum, understanding the unsearchable divine counsel of
your incarnation from the Virgin, O Most High, cried out: Glory to your
power, O Lord.

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 5. The Irmos.**

O Christ, you have become the Mediator between God and
mortals,[\[48\]](#_ftn48) for through you, Master, from the night of
ignorance we have access to your Father, the source of light.

**Troparia**

**O**** **All-immaculate, who bore the way of life, guide me now into
the right way, who have been senselessly hurled headlong into pathless
places and pits of harsh misdeeds.

**N**ow having exiled myself by my senseless mind, Virgin of God, I have
lived as a prodigal,[\[49\]](#_ftn49) wandering lost to the far country
of the passions; but turn me back, save me by your intercessions.

**M**other and Virgin immaculate, let your servant, burning with the
flame of sins and  aflame from the assaults of demons, drink from your
streams that flow with life.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

You appeared as a heavenly mind, O Theologian, by grace having become
all light by your nearness to the source of light, and by your eager
straining towards him becoming divine.

With pure mind, holy lips and all-chaste mouth, O God-inspired, you
proclaimed your Gospel and proposed to all believers a common salvation.

Dwelling with Christ from infancy, you have been put forward by him as
an instrument of grace, exercised in theology and supernaturally
initiated into the glory of the Trinity.

**Theotokion.**

Mindful of your words we now call you blessed, O All-blameless, most
truly enriched through you with ineffable blessedness and life that
knows no ageing.

**Another. With your divine light.**

Like morning you made the spiritual dawn shine for those on earth, O
Apostle, proclaiming to the world his dwelling in it with a body and his
dispelling the darkness of the cult of many gods.

The sacred streams of theology, sacred herald and Apostle, you use to
water every soul; therefore I cry to you: Water my heart, wholly dried
up by sins.

I have been struck by the enemy’s darts, by your care, wise Apostle,
make me whole, I beg, and direct me to the ways of God, who am ever led
astray in pathless places.

**Theotokion.**

As you stood with the beloved Disciple by the Cross of your Son,
All-blameless, you groaned and wept, and marvelled at his great
compassion towards mankind.

**Katavasia.**

The universe was amazed at your divine glory, for you, O Virgin, who
knew not wedlock held in your womb the God over all and gave birth to an
eternal Son, who gives salvation as the prize to all who sing your
praise.

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 6. The Irmos.**

Surrounded by a deep of offences, I call upon the unsearchable deep of
your compassion: O God, lead me up from corruption.

**Troparia**

**L**ady, at the judgement to come, do not point me out as an object of
the demons’ malignant joy, but entreat the Judge, your Son, to look
kindly on me.

**K**indling your anger by my thoughts and by my evil and lawless deeds,
O Lord, for pardon I bring you your Mother. Take pity, save me.

**J**udge and God of all, you bore, Lady all-praised. Therefore deliver
me from condemnation, who am self-condemned by my faults.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

Jesus, my God and Lord, con­tented with your purity and total chastity,
O Theologian, made you his brother.[\[50\]](#_ftn50)

Having crowned with sanctity your way of life, you thus with confidence
leant on the breast of wisdom, glorious Apostle, and from there drew
grace.

The great and godlike torches of your theology enlightened the whole
inhabited world, glorious Apostle, and suffused it with the light of
triple sun.

**Theotokion.**

He who stretched taut the heavens[\[51\]](#_ftn51) by his will, made
wide another heaven upon earth, you, O immaculate Mother of God, and he
dawned from you and appeared.

**Another. Watching life’s sea.**

Truly your theologian’s tongue was like the pen of a swift
writer,[\[52\]](#_ftn52) writing well true knowledge and a brand new
law, O Theologian, on the tables of our hearts.

As a skilled husbandman, wither up at their roots the plants of impiety,
glorious Apostle, and plant in my soul the fear of God, which makes the
fair fruit of virtues thrive.

The One who came forth from a Virgin clearly named you her
son.[\[53\]](#_ftn53) With her implore that all who do what is
well-pleasing may be named sons of God by adoption.

**Theotokion.**

From you, O all-blameless, God was made known to mortals in the likeness
of flesh. Ever implore him, O All-holy, to slay the de­structive
thoughts of our flesh.

**Katavasia.**

Come godly-minded people, as we celebrate this divine and honoured feast
of the Mother of God, let us clap our hands as we glorify the God who
was born of her.

**Kontakion. Tone 2.**

Who will recount your mighty works, O Virgin, for you pour out wonders
and are a source of healings, and you intercede on behalf of our souls,
**as Theologian and friend of Christ**.

**The Ikos.**

To learn wholly the high secrets of heaven, to investigate the depths of
the sea is rash and beyond comprehension; as therefore it is wholly
impossible to number all the stars and the sand on the sea shore, so it
is to tell the graces of the Theologian, with so many crowns Christ has
garlanded the one he loved; the one who leant on his
breast[\[54\]](#_ftn54) and feasted with him at the mystical supper,
**as Theologian and friend of Christ**.

**Synaxarion.**

On the 26th day of the same month, the Translation of the holy, glorious
Apostle and Evangelist, bosom friend, virgin, beloved, John the
Theologian.

**Verses.  
**Father’s beloved Word you stand beside,  
Beloved more than all of the Disciples.  
Passed on the twenty sixth day unto God the child of the thunder.

He was son of Zebedee and Salome, who was the daughter of Joseph the
Be­trothed; for Joseph had four sons, Jacob, Symeon, Juda and Joses,
and three daughters, Esther, Martha and Salome, who became the wife of
Zebedee and the mother of John; and so our Lord Jesus Christ was the
John’s uncle, as brother of Salome, Joseph’s daughter.

John is the one who leant on Christ’s breast, as greatly loved; and he
was also present at the betrayal and at the Cross; when he took the
Mother of God to his own home and served her until the Dormition. After
the Dormition the holy Apostles cast lots for where each of them should
go and preach, and the lot John received was to go to Asia. This upset
him, for he knew that he would be much tried at sea, as he foretold to
his disciple Prochoros. \[There follow a further five pages of small
print in double columns.\]

At his holy prayers have mercy on us, O God. Amen.

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 7. Irmos.**

The godless order of a lawless tyrant fanned the soaring flame; but
Christ let fall the dew of the Spirit upon the god-fearing
children.[\[55\]](#_ftn55) He is blessed and highly
exalted.[\[56\]](#_ftn56)

**Troparia**

**I**mpregnable wall, sure help, my strength and song and
salvation[\[57\]](#_ftn57) are you, O Lady, make war on the demons who
war against me and ever seek to put me to death.

**H**aving given God a body from your virgin blood, you made the human
divine, O Virgin; and so by your prayers deliver me who am fouled by the
passions and destroyed by the wiles of the foe.

**G**ave a foreshadowing the furnace of your giving birth, O
All-blameless; for it did not burn up the Youths, just as the
unendurable fire did not consume your womb; there­fore I beseech you,
deliver your servant from the everlasting fire.

**Of the Saint, the same Irmos.**

Shining with the outpouring of the divine light, you clearly revealed
the Holy Spirit who proceeds from the Father who has no beginning, and
rests in the Son as inseparably consubstantial.

In you, blessed Saint, the sun of justice made his dwelling,
[\[58\]](#_ftn58) making you an ever-moving heaven, and by your
theologian’s tongue, Beloved, Christ the highly
glorious[\[59\]](#_ftn59) is proclaimed.

The divine sound, the power of your words has gone out,[\[60\]](#_ftn60)
O holy and all-blessed, and your Gospel, higher than the world, has
encompassed the whole earth with the greatness of its doctrines.

**Theotokion.**

You alone displayed all-immaculate conceiving, child-birth without
corruption, while remaining virgin; for you conceived God, who is over
all, pure Virgin, when he became man for the salvation and redemption of
believers.

**Another. The Angel made the furnace.**

Let us hymn the thunder which re-echoed to all the ends of the earth,
through whom every senseless report has been removed from earth and
Christ, the Maker of the universe is magnified.

The celebrated beauty of your house[\[61\]](#_ftn61) makes every mind
radiant. Assembled in it always in a manner fitting God, we hymn the
Maker of all, and we praise you faithfully as our protector.

Knowing you to be a star radiating light, we beg you, Disciple of
Christ, that by your mediation we may be enlightened by your dazzling
beams and delivered from the darkness of the passions and from
temptations of every kind.

**Theotokion.**

We bless you, O all-blameless, who bore the blessed Lord, who crowned
with his divine blessings the nature of mortals which lay under a curse,
and made us new who had become old through corruption.

**Katavasia.**

The godlike Children did not worship creation instead of the Creator,
but bravely trampling on the threat of fire, rejoicing they sang: O
highly exalted Lord and God of our fathers, blessed are
you\![\[62\]](#_ftn62)

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 8.  
Irmos.**

A fiery furnace once in Babylon, by divine decree, divided its action,
burning up the Chaldeans but refreshing the faithful who sang: All you
works of the Lord, bless the Lord.

**Troparia**

**F**or what is good, my soul,  be zealous, keep far from wickedness
through the harmony of godly deeds, for you have God’s Mother who
intercedes for you as protection of all and who cannot be put to shame,
for she is compassionate and loves humankind.

**E**ver pure Bearer of God you released humanity from the bond of the
ancient condemnation; therefore I implore you, release every bond of
wickedness of my heart, binding me with the divine love of the Creator.

**D**eck my heart, made gloomy by the dishonour of offences, with
radiance, Mother of God, who gave birth to the splendour of the Father’s
glory,[\[63\]](#_ftn63) and make me a partaker of everlasting glory,
that with faith I may glorify you.

**Of the Saint. Same Irmos.**

Like a flash of light passing through the inhabited world, you appeared,
blessed Saint, shining on the world with the radiance of chastity, the
brightness of virginity and the doctrines of true religion, beloved of
Christ our God.

Purified in body, soul and mind, you proclaimed the heavenly Gospel of
Christ, and having become a companion of the Angels, you now cry out:
All you works, bless the Lord\![\[64\]](#_ftn64)

You have become a radiant votive offering and a godly ornament of the
heavenly temple and throne of perception and dwelling of wisdom,
instrument of theology, as you sing: All you works, highly exalt the
Lord\!

**Theotokion.**

That you might abolish the former curse and the sentence of death of the
Foremother of old, you were born, O Word of God, from a Virgin, God’s
Mother, bestowing on all indestructible immortality.

**Another. You were a fount of dew.**

You gained a skilful tongue, blessed saint, and gave life to those dead
through wickedness who accepted your sacred preaching; therefore we
honour you as initiate of ineffable mysteries.

As another Paradise has your divine house been revealed, O Apostle,
delighting the souls of all with wonders as with flowers and dispelling
the foul stench of the passions.

O God, my God, attend to me and deliver me each day from foes who assail
me and who crush my lowly heart, for I have your god­like Disciple to
intercede.

**Theotokion.**

O full of God’s grace, ask Jesus the Saviour, who took his body from
your pure blood, to have pity on your servants, and deliver us from
eternal punishment.

**Katavasia.**

The Offspring of the Mother of God saved the innocent Youths in the
furnace. Then he was prefigured, but now in reality he gathers the whole
world which sings: All you works praise the Lord, and highly exalt him
to all the ages.[\[65\]](#_ftn65)

**Of the Mother of God. Ode 9. Irmos.**

The Son of the Father without beginning, God and Word, incarnate of a
Virgin, has appeared to us, to give light to what is darkened, to gather
what is scattered; and so the all-hymned Mother of God we magnify.

**Troparia**

**C**ropped Adam bitter death from the tree for tasting food that was
not his;[\[66\]](#_ftn66) but your Son, nailed to a tree, became a
source of the sweetness of immortality, O Immaculate; for this we honour
you.

**B**earing beyond understanding the King and Lord, who destroyed the
palaces of Hell, you have become Queen, O Maiden; implore him
insistently that all who honour you make be made worthy of the kingdom
above.

**A**s you gave birth to the Good, and alone are good, Sovereign Lady,
make good my lowly heart made wicked by the floods of pleasures, and
bring me to the good gates of repentance.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

Now not dimly, but face to face,[\[67\]](#_ftn67) you have been granted
to see the flood of delight, the river of peace, and the fount of
immortality; drawing from which you divine life.[\[68\]](#_ftn68)

You asked to receive an earthly seat from Christ;[\[69\]](#_ftn69) but
he himself gave you his breast, O Theologian, leaning on which, the only
sure stay,[\[70\]](#_ftn70) you were enriched with goodness, O ornament
of Apostles.

You quenched the godlessness of Greek wisdom, wise Apostle, when you
proclaimed: In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God and
the Word was truly God, though whom all things came to be, both visible
and invisible.[\[71\]](#_ftn71)

**Theotokion.**

Like early dawn you were found, blazing in the night of life with the
rays of virginity, revealing to us the dawn of the spiritual Sun of
justice,[\[72\]](#_ftn72) O all-honoured Mother of God.

**Another. It is impossible for mortals.**

Sovereign Lord of times and seasons, the Redeemer was hanged upon the
tree in the middle of the day and entrusted to you, blessed Apostle, as
a virgin, the Ever-Virgin,[\[73\]](#_ftn73) giving an irremovable glory
to magnify you.

Even as you join with the divine Powers above and with them cry aloud
the divine song, save by your mediations, those who chant and praise in
your holy house the One who is supremely good, O Apostle of Christ.

Save from every danger, blessed Theologian, us who with faith call on
you for help, in spirit direct our paths towards the Lord and guide us
to the way of peace, the commandments of the Almighty.

**Theotokion.**

Let us now bring to God’s Mother an outstanding prayer of thanks, and
let us now cry out: Hail, most high throne of God; hail cloud of light;
hail, paradise, through whom may we be worthy of the delight of
Paradise.

**Katavasia.**

Let all born of earth bearing torches, in spirit leap for joy; let the
nature of the immaterial spirits honour and celebrate the wondrous
sa­cred festival of the Mother of God, and let them cry: Hail,
all-blessed Mother of God, pure and Ever-Virgin\!

**Exapostilarion. Women hear.**

Becoming son of thunder[\[74\]](#_ftn74) you proclaimed to mortals: In
the beginning was the Word,[\[75\]](#_ftn75) Apostle John; for
faithfully leaning on your Master’s breast[\[76\]](#_ftn76) and drawing
thence the streams of theology, you water the whole creation.

**Theotokion.**

As you stood by the Cross of your Lord, All-pure one, with the virgin
Disciple, you heard from the creator: Woman, behold your son; while to
the Disciple likewise he said: Behold your mother; with him we all hymn
you, Virgin Mother of God.[\[77\]](#_ftn77)

**At Lauds we insert 4 prosomia.  
Tone 8. O marvellous wonder.**

Blessed and all-wise John, with fervent abundance of the love of Christ
you appeared more loved than all Disciples; to the all-seeing Word, who
judges the whole inhabited world by just scales of purity and chastity,
shining brightly with beauties in body and mind, O blessed of God.

Lying on wisdom’s breast[\[78\]](#_ftn78) you drew forth the streams of
theology and watered the world, most excellent John, drying up the sea
of godlessness with the knowl­edge of the Trinity, becoming a pillar and
living cloud[\[79\]](#_ftn79) guiding us to our heavenly inheritance.

The flowering of virginity, the acceptable dwelling of revered virtues,
instrument of wisdom, the sacred enclosure of the Spirit, the
light-bearing mouth of grace, the radiant eye of the Church,
all-honoured John, let us now praise with spiritual sons as a servant of
Christ.

Inspired Evangelist, proclaiming the good news of the source of good
things, an unshakeable kingdom and eternal life, inexpressible joy and
enjoyment of divine contemplation, richly given gifts of Christ,
surpassing the mind and understanding of mortals, O offspring of
thunder,[\[80\]](#_ftn80) you shone on the world.

Glory. **Tone 8.**

Evangelist John, Virgin equal to the Angels, Theologian taught by God,
with right belief you proclaimed to the world the immaculate side which
poured forth blood and water,[\[81\]](#_ftn81) by which we procure
eternal life for our souls.

Both now. **Theotokion.**

Lady, accept the supplications of your servants, and deliver us from
every constraint and tribulation.

**Great Doxology and Dismissal.**

**At the Liturgy, Typika and from the 3rd and 6th Odes of the Canons.**

**Communion.**

His sound has gone out into all the earth, and his words to the ends of
the world. Alleluia.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Cf. Apocalypse 1,1.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Cf. Song of Songs 1,1.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Cf. Mark 3,17.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) John 1,1.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) John 1,9

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Mark 3,17.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) John 1,1. The word ‘was’ is not in the text of the
hymn.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Cf. John 14,8-11

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) John 1,3-5.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Hebrews 10,1.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Exodus 3,2.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Exodus 13,21.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Malachy 3,20 (4,2).

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) John 19,25-27.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) John 1,1.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) John 1,1.9.

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Cf. Nicene Creed.

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Hebrews 1,3.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) 2 Corinthians 4,6.

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) Psalm 18,4.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) John 15,26; Nicene Creed.

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) Psalm 18,1.

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) John 1,1.

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) Cf. the definition of Nicea (325).

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) Exodus 33,11; Sirach 45,1. I know of no passage in
which Isaias receives a similar description.

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Genesis 3,17-19.

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) Luke 1,26.

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[31\]](#_ftnref31) Mark 3,17.

[\[32\]](#_ftnref32) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[33\]](#_ftnref33) Matthew 4,19.

[\[34\]](#_ftnref34) John 13,23-26.

[\[35\]](#_ftnref35) Cf. Exodus 15,1-19; the first Canticle.

[\[36\]](#_ftnref36) Psalm 44,9.

[\[37\]](#_ftnref37) Matthew 25,33.

[\[38\]](#_ftnref38) Cf. John 1,1. St Theophanes uses ‘Begetter’ rather
than ‘God’ for metrical reasons.

[\[39\]](#_ftnref39) John 1,1.

[\[40\]](#_ftnref40) Cf. Psalm 44,1.

[\[41\]](#_ftnref41) 1 Reigns 2,1; i.e. from the third Canticle.

[\[42\]](#_ftnref42) Psalm 44,1.

[\[43\]](#_ftnref43) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[44\]](#_ftnref44) John 19,25-27. John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[45\]](#_ftnref45) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[46\]](#_ftnref46) John 1,1.

[\[47\]](#_ftnref47) The last clause, ‘Glory to your power, O Lord\!’,
is found the fourth Ode of numerous canons. It even occurs in the
heading of the fourth canticle in the *Horologion.* It is not, however,
as one might have expected, a citation from the scriptural text.

[\[48\]](#_ftnref48) 1 Timothy 2,5.

[\[49\]](#_ftnref49) Luke 15,13.

[\[50\]](#_ftnref50) Cf. John 19,25-27.

[\[51\]](#_ftnref51) Psalm 103,2.

[\[52\]](#_ftnref52) Psalm 44,3.

[\[53\]](#_ftnref53) John 19,25-27.

[\[54\]](#_ftnref54) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[55\]](#_ftnref55) Daniel 3.

[\[56\]](#_ftnref56) Daniel 3,53.

[\[57\]](#_ftnref57) Exodus 15,2.

[\[58\]](#_ftnref58) Malachy 3,20 (4,2); Psalm 18,4.

[\[59\]](#_ftnref59) Daniel 3,53.

[\[60\]](#_ftnref60) Cf. Psalm 18,4.

[\[61\]](#_ftnref61) Psalm 25,8.

[\[62\]](#_ftnref62) Daniel 3.

[\[63\]](#_ftnref63) Hebrews 1,3.

[\[64\]](#_ftnref64) Daniel 3,52.

[\[65\]](#_ftnref65) Daniel 3,52.

[\[66\]](#_ftnref66) Genesis 3.

[\[67\]](#_ftnref67) 1 Corinthians 13,12.

[\[68\]](#_ftnref68) Cf. Apocalypse 22,1.

[\[69\]](#_ftnref69) Mark 10,35-40.

[\[70\]](#_ftnref70) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[71\]](#_ftnref71) John 1,1-3; Nicene Creed.

[\[72\]](#_ftnref72) Malachy 3,20 (4,2).

[\[73\]](#_ftnref73) John 19,25-27.

[\[74\]](#_ftnref74) Mark 3,17.

[\[75\]](#_ftnref75) John 1,1.

[\[76\]](#_ftnref76) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[77\]](#_ftnref77) John 19,25-27.

[\[78\]](#_ftnref78) John 13,21; 21,20.

[\[79\]](#_ftnref79) Exodus 13,21.

[\[80\]](#_ftnref80) Mark 3,17.

[\[81\]](#_ftnref81) John 19,34.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

