\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](aug.md) \] \[ [1 August](1august.md) \]
\[ [4 August](4august.md) \] \[ 5 August \] \[ [15 August](15aug.md) \]
\[ [16 August](16august.md) \] \[ [29 August](29_august.md) \]

## INTRODUCTORY NOTE

This translation of the office for 5 August only contains the texts for
the Forefeast. I have added a number of footnotes containing the
references to biblical passages alluded to in the texts.

One curious feature of Matins is the presence of a Triode. One would 
rather have expected one at Compline. The Irmi of the main Canon are
those of the Mother of God.

-----

# on the 5th of the month

Forefeast of the Holy Transfiguration of our Lord and God and Saviour,
Jesus Christ; and commemoration of the Holy Martyr Efsignios.

### AT VESPERS

At Lord, I have cried, we insert 6 stichera, and sing 3 prosomia of the
Forefeast.

Tone 4. You have given as a sign**.**

Come, let us go up with Jesus, as he ascends the holy mountain, and
there let us hear the voice of the living God, the Father without
beginning, which through a cloud of light bears witness by the divine
Spirit to the truth of his eternal Sonship, and enlightened in mind, in
light we shall see light[\[1\]](#_ftn1).

Come, let us dance beforehand, purify ourselves and faithfully prepare
ourselves for the divine ascent of the exalted life of God, that we may
become spectators of his majesty, and attain the glory which the leaders
of the Apostles were allowed to see mystically on Mount Thabor.

Come now, having undergone the greater change, let us prepare ourselves
well to approach the holy mountain of God as we contemplate the
unchanging glory of Christ blazing forth more brightly than the sun, and
made radiant by the triple light, in it let us glorify his
condescension.

Glory. Both now. Tone 5.

Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the house of our
God, and let us contemplate the glory of his Transfiguration, glory as
of the only-begotten of the Father. By light let us receive light; and
let us, borne aloft in spirit, hymn the consubstantial Trinity to the
ages.

At the Aposticha, prosomia.  
Tone 2. House of Ephratha.

Shining with the light of the virtues, let us go to the holy mountain to
see the divine Transfiguration of the Lord

Verse: Yours are the heavens and yours is the earth; you have founded
the inhabited world and its fullness.[\[2\]](#_ftn2)

Before the Cross, Christ shows an inspired sign of his Godhead to his
initiates, shining out to-day on the mountain like the sun.

Verse: Thabor and Hermon will rejoice in your name.[\[3\]](#_ftn3)

Wishing to better the nature he took from Adam, Christ now ascends
Thabor, baring his Godhead to his initiates.

Glory. Both now. Tone 2. 

Christ our God, transfigured on mount Thabor in glory, and showing your
Disciples the glory of your Godhead, illumine us also with the light of
your knowledge, and guide us in the path of your
commandments,[\[4\]](#_ftn4) as you alone are good and love humankind. 

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. 

Let us believers, as we radiantly celebrate the forefeast, go out to
meet the Transfiguration of Christ, and let us cry, ‘The day of joy
inspired is near; the Master ascends mount Thabor to make the beauty of
his Godhead blaze forth’.

### AT MATINS

After the first Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma of the Forefeast.

Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.

A day of joy has now come for the faithful, day of the divine, and
glorious Transfiguration of Christ our God. So let us all be made
radiant to glorify worthily in songs inspired his mighty works, by
which, shining out as God, he enlightened the world.

Glory. Both. The same.

After the second Reading, Kathisma.  
Tone 1. The soldiers watching.

Let all of us believers go up to Mount Thabor together with Christ’s
chosen Disciples, and let us in mind contemplate his Transfiguration,
and let us glorify his supreme condescension towards us, through which
he grants the world eternal life.

Then the Canons of the Forefeast and of the Saint.

Canon of the Forefeast, of which the Acrostic is the Alphabet.

Ode 1. Tone 4. I will open my mouth.

Light of heaven, blaze out from below more brightly than the sun; and
earth give ear to the words of the living God; for the Father will bear
witness on mount Thabor to the One transfigured, of his Sonship.

To sight a mortal, but God in hiddenness, Christ ascends Thabor to lay
bare the radiance of his Godhead by the splendours of his glory which
shines more brightly than the sun.

Christ knowingly now goes forward to appear to Moses and to reveal his
ineffable glory on mount Thabor, by conversing with him directly face to
face.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) Let us today with gladness celebrate the forefeast.

And the Canon of the Saint.

Then the Triode of the Forefeast.  
Ode 1. Tone 4. I will sing to you, Lord my God.

As we, the faithful, celebrate this day of the forefeast of the
Transfiguration of Christ our Redeemer, let us clap our hands and sing.

As we have reached the entry of the holy Transfiguration of Christ, let
us too blaze with divine changes as we welcome it.

If we possess a high mountain, a heart purified of passions, we shall
see the Transfiguration of Christ enlightening our mind.

Glory.

Let us all worship a Trinity of distinct persons, a Unity, a divine
nature, the Father without beginning, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

Both now. Theotokion.

Let all of us the faithful sing the praise as truly Mother of God of the
blameless Maiden, from whom Christ our God came forth in the flesh
without change.

Forefeast. Ode 3. O Mother of God.

You, the Master of all creation, appeared having taken the form of a
servant,[\[6\]](#_ftn6) in which you revealed the unapproachable
brightness of your Godhead to the Disciples, as far as they could look
upon it.

Christ the sun of glory hastens to blaze forth on the mountain and to
darken by his light the beacon which shines from on high. Made radiant
by his beams, let us today celebrate the forefeast.

About to fulfil the words of eternal life Christ is present; as by deeds
he shows that he was well-pleased for his friends to recognize in
himself the Father’s glory blazing forth.

Kathisma of the Saint.

Glory. Both now. Of the Forefeast.  
Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

The Sun of glory has appeared, has blazed forth the rays of the Godhead
to those in darkness,[\[7\]](#_ftn7) as he goes up to Thabor. Let us
honour his light-bearing coming.

Of the Forefeast. Ode 4. The One seated in glory.

The heavenly choir joins in gladness those on earth and feasts in
advance the shining out of the Giver of light, which he will make to
blaze beyond compare, surpassing the mortal form on Thabor; as he was
well-pleased.

By your coming as God and man you spoke with men, and by a multitude of
wonders you mystically illumined the world, by the blazing glory of your
Godhead you shone forth supremely on Thabor with unapproachable light.

Jesus, the offspring of Nave, of old stopped the sun,[\[8\]](#_ftn8)
prefiguring the day of the divine Passion; while you, Saviour and Lord,
before your honoured Cross, hid the brightness of the sun with the
radiance of your Face.

Of the Saint.

Of the Forefeast. Ode 5. The universe was amazed.

Rejoicing in the Lord, let us faithfully follow him; for see, he is
going up to the mount, taking with him the chosen initiates, to whom he
will show his glory as he shines more brightly than the sun with
unapproachable beauty.

Let heaven shine more radiantly today; for see, Christ will ascend the
mount, from where he will blaze with infinite light, as giver of light
darkening the rays of the sun with the glory of the Godhead.

Christ shows his Disciples a mystery on Thabor as with his face he
shines beyond radiance, and through the raiment of his garments he
becomes shining white as snow,[\[9\]](#_ftn9) the One who is clothed in
light as in a garment,[\[10\]](#_ftn10) as the Psalmist says.

Of the Saint.

Of the Forefeast. Ode 6. Come, godly-minded people.

Making ready for his friends the bridal chamber of glory of the joy to
come Christ ascends the mountain, bringing them up from a lowly life on
earth to a way of life high above the world.

Astonishing the minds of the Disciples, Christ made the radiance of
heaven blaze out on earth, placing beside him in the manner of servants
the leaders of the Law and the Prophets, by whom, both dead and
living,[\[11\]](#_ftn11) God is witnessed to.

Christ the lamp now begins to appear in a parched place with the rays of
the divine lightning. Let us journey towards his brilliance, rejoicing
in the radiance of his face.

Of the Saint.

Kontakion of the Forefeast.  
Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

In the divine Transfiguration all mortal nature divinely shines forth
today, as with gladness it cries: Christ is transfigured, saving all.

Another, of the Saint.

Synaxarion.

On the 5th of the month, Forefeast of the holy Transfiguration of our
Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, and commemoration of the holy
Martyr Efsignios.

Verses.  
They execute Efsignios, Christ’s friend,  
Who cries until the blow: To Christ my worship\!  
And on the fifth of the month Efsignios’ head with dust mingled.

On the same day Saints Kattidios and Kattidianos, Martyrs and blood
brothers, died by being stoned.

Verses.  
They piled up lofty hills of stones, O Christ,  
By means of which two brothers climbed to you.

On the same day Saint Nonna, the mother of St Gregory the Divine, died
in peace.

Verses.  
Fair offspring to fair Nonna in her death  
Gives a fair speech of burial, his words.

On the same day Saint Soleb the Egyptian was pierced by an arrow
\[belos\] and died.

Verses.

If backwards, Soleb, you should spell your name,  
‘Belos’ you’ll get, instrument of your end.

On the same day the holy Bishop and Martyr Fabius (or Fabian), Bishop of
Rome, died by the sword.

Verses.  
Fabius lies dead, Christ’s sacrificing priest,  
New sacrifice offered to Christ by sword.

At the prayers of your Saints, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

Of the Forefeast. Ode 7. The godlike Youths.

Let us now follow Christ as he leads the chosen Disciples to a height of
soul far above the world, as we contemplate strange sights. Filled with
amazement let us cry out with them: Blessed are you, O God\!

Having cleansed sullied mortal nature by water and
fire,[\[12\]](#_ftn12) in your own flesh, you show, O Saviour, its
splendour by your face, as you shine more brightly than the sun, as a
figure of the glory to come.

Let us go up with Christ to the holy mountain, as he takes with him the
sons of Zebedee and Peter, the leader, whom he chose as witnesses of his
own glory as they cried: Blessed are you, O God\!

Of the Saint.

Forefeast. Ode 8. The Offspring of the Mother of God.

Who would not be amazed, O Word, Sovereign of all, at the majesty of
your glory? Which, when transfigured, you showed to your friends as you
surrounded them with divine splendours. With them make us who sing your
praise radiant by your light, as we celebrate the forefeast.

Grant the height of a heavenly way of life and the divine brilliance of
the eternal glory to your servants, who now celebrate the radiant
festival of your Transfiguration; on which, blazing with light, you make
radiant those who sing your praise, Christ the giver of light.

You are light and giver of unapproachable[\[13\]](#_ftn13) and eternal
light, Lord without beginning, who wrap yourself in light as in a
garment; you shed light on the world when you came with flesh; and you
blaze with light on the mountain revealing the imprint of the Father’s
glory.

Of the Saint.

Triode of the Forefeast. Christ the King.

The present day of the radiant Transfiguration of the Lord, shining
beforehand on the world, urges us to cry out: All you his works praise
and highly exalt Christ to the ages.

Come, believers, let us go towards the holy mountain, to see the
all-radiant Transfiguration of Christ; for it illumines all who glorify
it to the ages.

Today let us go in advance to meet the Transfiguration of Christ with
pure heart, and let us cry to him: All you his works, praise and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

Glory.

The one Godhead in three persons which is proclaimed together, Father,
Son and all-holy Spirit, all you works praise and highly exalt to all
the ages.

Both now. Theotokion.

O fearsome wonder\! How is a virgin, child of God, a mother and how does
she give birth to the Master of heaven and earth? Him then, all you his
works, praise and highly exalt to all the ages\!

Of the Forefeast. Ode 9. Let all born of earth.

Heaven rejoices as it now perceives dawning from earth the unsetting
Sun, which is about to dim the radiance of the sun by divine glory.
Earth dances radiantly, resplendent with heavenly brightness it becomes
light.

David in psalms foretold your Transfiguration: Who will be likened to
you, Lord, he said, among the sons of God? For you are glorified in the
counsels of the Saints, you appeared great among those around
you,[\[14\]](#_ftn14) fearful in the glory of your divine form.

O Word of God, wisdom and power and imprint[\[15\]](#_ftn15) of the
Father. O God, so known to believers and acknowledged as man, count us
worthy to celebrate the radiant festival of your Transfiguration, and to
shine out with the light of good works.

Of the Saint.

Triode of the Forefeast. You that knew not wedlock

As we celebrate this day which precedes your all-glorious and
all-shining Transfiguration, Lord, in hymns we magnify you.

Transformed to the fair transformation by the Transfiguration of Christ,
let us be found shining with light by our good deeds as we magnify it.

Standing at the threshold of the glorious Transfiguration of the Lord,
let us be made spiritually radiant in our minds as we magnify it.

Glory.

Essence in Trinity and Unity, with all authority, the Father, Son and
Holy Spirit, in hymns we magnify you.

Both now. Theotokion.

Most holy Mother of God, higher than the hosts on high, O alone pure of
all creation, in hymns we magnify you.

Exapostilarion.

Of the Forefeast. With the Disciples let us go.

We who desire wholly the divine glory, let us cut away the fog of what
is earthly and fleshly, as raised high above earth we ascend mount
Thabor; and let us hasten to be found worthy to share with Moses and
Elias and the princes of the Apostles in the divine and unapproachable
radiance, receiving light by light.

At the Aposticha, Prosomia of the Forefeast.  
Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

As we go beforehand to meet the all-holy, glorious Transfiguration, on
this present day we glorify Christ who refigured our nature with the
fire of the Godhead and made it blaze with incorruption as at first.

Verse: Mercy and truth have met; justice and peace have
kissed.[\[16\]](#_ftn16)

Come, let us ascend the holy mountain and let us look upon the
all-shining Transfiguration of the Lord, as we faithfully worship him
and say: You alone are our God, who became incarnate and made the human
divine.

Verse: Lord, they will walk in the light of your face.[\[17\]](#_ftn17)

This is the day of the forefeast, after which Christ is transfigured in
the presence of Moses and Elias and his Disciples on mount Thabor; while
the divine voice speaks: This is truly my chosen Son.

Glory. Both now. Tone 5.

Seeing you in the cloud, O Christ, Moses, who saw God, and Elias, the
fiery charioteer and traveller to heaven unconsumed by fire, bore
witness at your Transfiguration to you as maker and fulfiller of Law and
Prophets. With them, Master, count us also worthy of your illumination,
to sing your praise to the ages.

And Dismissal.

 

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Cf. Psalm 35:10. Some editions of the Menaion have a
subjunctive, ‘let us/may we see’. The Psalter has the indicative. The
subjunctive in the third sticheron suggests that the original text may
have had a subjunctive here also. 

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Psalm 88:12.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Psalm 88:13.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Psalm 118:35.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Cf. Exodus 33:11.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Phil. 2:7.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Luke 1:79.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Jos. 10:12-13.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) In the Gospel this comparison is used of the Angels
at the resurrection, Matthew 28:3, not of the Transfiguration.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Psalm 103:2.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Moses died before entering the Promised Land; Elias
was taken up alive into heaven on a fiery chariot.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) An allusion to the tradition that fire appeared in
the Jordan at the moment of Christ’s baptism.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Cf. 1 Timothy 6:16.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Psalm 88:7-8

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) Cf. Hebrews 1:3.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Psalm 84:11.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Psalm 88:16.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

