\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ 6 September \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ [15 September](15_september.md) \] \[ [23 September](23sept.md) \]
\[ [24 September](24sept.md) \] \[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

# ON THE 6TH OF THE MONTH

****

The commemoration of the wonder that took place at Colossae, or Chonae,
through the Archangel Michael.

## 

AT VESPERS

****

At

Lord, I have cried, **we insert 6 Stichera and sing Prosomia, doubling
them.**

Tone 4. As noblest of Martyrs.

Revealed as a brightly shining attendant of the three-sunned Godhead,
Michael, Chief Captain of the Powers on high, you cry aloud with joy,
‘Holy are you, O Father, Holy, O Son like him without beginning, Holy
also, O Holy Spirit; one glory, one kingship, one nature, one Godhead
and power’.

Your form is of fire and your beauty wondrous, Michael, first of the
Angels, for with your immaterial nature you pass through the ends of the
earth fulfilling the commands of the Maker of all things, acknowledged
as powerful in your strength and making your church, honoured with your
name, a source of healings.

As it is written, Lord, you make your Angels spirits and those who
minister to you a fiery flame. You have revealed Michael the Chief
Captain to be the leader among the ranks of Archangels, as he obeys your
wishes, O Word, and with fear raises the Thrice-holy Hymn of praise to
your glory.

Glory.

**Tone 6. By Vyzantios.**

Rejoice with us, all you leaders of the Angels, for your commander and
our champion, the great Chief Captain, hallows this present day as he
appears in his holy place. Therefore as is fitting we sing his praises
as we cry out, ‘Shelter us in the shelter of your wings, great Archangel
Michael’.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Rejoice with us, all you choirs of Virgins, for our defence and
intercessor, protection and great refuge by her revered and godlike
concern brings comfort on this present day to the afflicted. Therefore
as is fitting we sing her praises as we cry out, ‘Shelter us by your
godlike protection, all-pure Lady, Mother of God’.

****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia.  
Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

As leader of the heavenly hosts and strong defender, guard and deliverer
of those on earth we sing your praise with faith, Michael Chief Captain,
as we implore you to deliver us from every pain that brings destruction.

****

Verse:

Who makes his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.

The leader of the godlike Powers on high today invites the choirs of
mortals to celebrate with Angels one radiant feast of their assembly and
together sing to God the Thrice-holy Hymn.

****

Verse:

Bless the Lord, O my soul; O Lord, my God, you have been greatly
magnified.

Michael, godlike mind, guard under the shelter of your godlike wings us
who have recourse to you in faith, and protect us throughout our life,
and at the hour of death, Archangel, be present for us all as a most
kindly helper.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 8. By Monk John.**

As leader and champion and prince of the Angels, glorious Chief Captain,
free from every constraint and affliction, diseases and dread sins those
who sincerely sing your praise and clearly beseech you, as one
immaterial who contemplate the Immaterial and are made radiant by the
unapproachable light of the Master of glory; for he took flesh from a
Virgin for our sake through love for humankind, as he wished to save
that which is human.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

Chief Captain of the heavenly armies, we the unworthy implore you to
protect us by your supplications with the shelter of the wings of your
immaterial glory, guarding us as we fall down and insistently cry out:
Deliver us from dangers, as Chief Captain of the Powers on high.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The mystery hidden from all eternity and unknown to Angels, has been
revealed to those on earth through you, O Mother of God: God being made
flesh in a union without confusion, and willingly accepting the Cross
for us, through which he raised the first-formed man and saved our souls
from death.

## 

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.  
Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

As we frequent your revered temple and in it devoutly magnify you as
leader of the immaterial hosts, with faith we beseech you, godlike Chief
Captain, ‘Rescue us all from the tyranny of enemies, and deliver us from
the future threat and from Gehenna by your entreaties’.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

May we, the unworthy, never cease to speak of your acts of power, O
Mother of God. For if you had not stood by to intercede, who had
delivered us from so many dangers? Who had kept us free until now? May
we never desert you, Sovereign Lady; for you ever save your servants
from disasters of every kind.

****

After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.  
Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

Chief Captain of the bodiless ministers, you stand in God’s presence and
shine with the radiance that comes from there; make bright and sanctify
those who faithfully sing your praise, deliver them from every tyranny
of the foe and ask for a peaceful life for the Rulers and for all the
ends of the earth.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Let us humble sinners now hasten to the Mother of God, and let us fall
down in repentance as we cry from the depth of the soul: Sovereign Lady,
help, have compassion on us, hasten, for we perish by a multitude of
offences; do not turn your servants empty away; for we have gained you
as our only hope.

****

The Canons to the [Mother of God](lparacan.md) and the Archangel; after
which, if you like, sing Katavasias as well:

I shall open my mouth. ****

The Canon of the Archangel, of which the Acrostic is:

  
I sing the first of the bodiless minds. Joseph. ****

Ode 1. Tone 4.

Always ablaze with the divine radiance, make bright my soul to sing your
praise, Chief Captain of the hosts on high, strength of all who have
recourse to you.

The Mind before all eternity declared you, all-honoured Chief Captain,
to be leader of the heavenly army, light of those in darkness and
brightness of his Church.

Leader in spirit of the heavenly Minds, you have been given to those
below, all-noble Michael, as rampart and might and as a sword that
slaughters and wipes out our foes.

****

Theotokion.

All-blameless Virgin, the glory of the Angels, the help of mankind, help
me who am at sea and ever falling and endangered by a tempest of sin.

****

Another Canon. Same Tone.  
Also by Joseph.

  
\[**Acrostic in the 9th Ode:** Joseph.\]

Let us sing with harmonious praise the prince of the Angels, the shining
sun, who sheds his light on the earth with the splendours of his wonders
and ever drives away the gloom of temptations.

Lord, who made the Angels a flame of fire as they mightily fulfil your
all-holy will, you revealed resplendent in their midst like a star
Michael, the Chief Captain.

Let us all sing the praise of the loving Lord who has given us as a wall
invincible to foes and an immovable support holy Michael who always
savings us from dangers.

By your godlike care you ever render your godlike house a place of
propitiation for sinners, a refuge for the wronged and a place that puts
all diseases to flight, O first of God’s angels.

Crush the children of Hagar without ceasing who are roused against us,
glorious one, and rescue us from their expectation and oppression, that
we may always honour you as our loving protector.

****

Theotokion.

It is a wonder beyond understanding how God the incomprehensible has
been made one with mortals by being born hypostatically from you in the
flesh, O Virgin who knew not wedlock, saving me who had been made
subject to corruption by the serpent’s fraud.

****

Ode 3.

With godlike strength, all-praised Captain of the Angels, you surround
the whole earth, taking us from dangers who call upon your godlike name.

Most godlike Chief Captain of God, you have been named divine herald,
defender of believers who cannot be put to shame. guide and instructor
of the erring.

Michael, chief Angel, worthy of wonder, you have appeared as a clear
mirror of the divine light, for you receive the resplendent reflections
of the holy Spirit.

****

Theotokion.

The One who by his will brought into being the immaterial Minds dwells
by his will in your material womb, All-blameless; The one who cannot be
beheld is seen in flesh.

****

Another.

As you stand beside the throne of the Trinity, made divine by
participation and illumined by the rays that come from there, illumine
those who sing your praise, Chief Captain of God.

When Jesus saw you holding a sword in your hand, he was struck with
amazement at your fearsome sight and cried out: What do you now command
your servant to do, Lord?

You were set by God as ruler of the Jewish nation; but now, Chief
Captain, as helper and deliverer of Christians, delivering them from
constraints and afflictions.

Let us give greatness to the Lord, who has given us a champion and
helper in afflictions, the great Chief Captain, through whom we are ever
rescued from godless barbarians.

Chief Captain, imploring God the Most High, speedily bring back those
who been led away and miserably enslaved to foreign nations.

****

Theotokion.

Daniel describes you as a great mountain, O Immaculate, while Avvakoum
as a mountain shaded by virtues and David as a curdled mountain, from
which God has become incarnate and redeemed the world.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

Having by the Creator’s command become the leader of the heavenly hosts
and minister of the divine glory, you are a saving mediator for
Christians, taking them from dangers by you immaterial glory; therefore
as it fitting we all praise you as we hymn your godlike festival,
Michael, Chief Captain. Intercede with Christ God to grant forgiveness
of faults to those who celebrate with love your godlike wonders.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The Wisdom and Word you conceived in your womb unscathed, O Mother of
God; you bore for the world the One who possesses the world and held in
your arms the One who hold all things and who nourishes all, the Creator
of nature. Therefore I implore you, all-holy Virgin, that I may be
delivered from faults when I am about to stand before the face of my
Maker. Sovereign Lady, pure Virgin, grant me then your help; for you are
able to do whatever you wish, O all-praised.

****

Ode 4.

The primal Mind brought into being the divine Minds by his will and
created in their midst Michael as prince, illumined by all-blessed
participation and blazing with thoughts whose origin is God.

All-revered Michael you raise a holy hymn with Thrones, Principalities,
Powers, Authorities and the sacred Dominions, to the Trinity, as you
save those who sing your praise.

We magnify the Maker and Lord of all things, who has given us through
his compassion a great safeguard and infallible wall and bulwark,
Michael, the resplendent Chief Captain.

****

Theotokion.

Of old the Revealer of sacred mysteries was initiated in mind into the
strange marvel of your child-bearing, O Virgin, seeing you inspirit most
clearly as a shaded mountain, from which there came the Holy One, God in
a body.

****

Another.

As of old you put to flight the horde of Sennachirim’s people by your
godlike ordinance, so smash the children of Hagar who war and descend on
the faithful people, Michael Chief Captain.

How fearsome is your form, how truly wondrous your beauty, Michael, how
resplendent your glory, which, as you accomplish unnumbered marvels, you
reveal to all who love you.

As you traverse the things on high you visit fearsomely each day those
below, rescuing from many disasters, dangers and afflictions all those
who call to you, Minister of God.

See, the divine place; see, the refuge of the afflicted; see, the
all-holy house, which the great Chief Captain reveals a truly a haven of
many who being saved.

You appeared as a pillar of fire to godly minded Archippos, when a
lawless people was hasting to flood with limitless waters your sacred
enclosure, O Prince of the Powers on high.

****

Theotokion.

Gabriel came bringing you the ‘Hail’ from on high, O All-pure; with him
therefore we cry aloud: Hail Gate, through which Christ alone has
passed, the God who saves humanity.

****

Ode 5.

You appeared at the head of the Israel of old, at the commands of the
One who appeared to mortals from Jacob in the solidity of a body, O
bodiless Michael, Chief Captain of the Angels.

Deified by immaterial splendours through divine participation, you give
to us also the illuminating radiance, O First of Angels, as you
wondrously work marvels.

You godlike church has been made lovely by grace; for as you visit it
you reveal it be an ocean of healings and a remedy against passions,
Michael First of Angels.

****

Theotokion.

God declared you to be higher than the spiritual Angels, O Immaculate,
when he came down into your all-blameless womb. Ever implore him to take
pity on those who sing your praise.

****

Another.

Knowing beforehand the marvels that you were to accomplish in your
shrine, O First of Angels, the heralds of the Word proclaimed it
beforehand to all. We see clearly their fulfilment.

At your divine prompting, Archangel, he raised a house for prayer when
he saw the cure of the child by the water which teemed with grace, he
who before had blasphemed your gifts.

Approach, draw grace and mercy together\! The inexhaustible source of
healings lies open for all; the source which the Chief Captain revealed
to us by divine intimations.

Sight is given to the blind, hearing to the deaf, ease of movement to
all the lame, speech to the dumb in your godly house, Michael First of
Angels, provider of blessings.

Crush the insolence of the barbarians who seek to wipe out your flock,
Chief Captain; deliver those who have been taken prisoner by them, that
they may ever praise you with us.

****

Theotokion.

You surpass the angelic Powers and you gave birth to the God and king of
all. With them, all-holy Lady, implore him to save us all.

****

Ode 6.

The multitude of the faithful rejoices as it praises you, and glorifies
the all-holy Word who united mortals with Angels, Michael, by his
goodness.

You appeared and saved the army of Israel, and fulfilling the divine
ordinances, Chief Captain, you destroyed their enemies and wiped them
out completely.

When he saw you Jesus, son of Navi, worshipped and, seized by reverence
and fear, asked your revered and holy name, Prince of Angels.

****

Theotokion.

Blessed the people who ever calls you blessed, O blessed one you gave
birth to the blessed God, who by an ineffable union has made mortals
divine through pity.

****

Another.

Those who of old wished to obliterate by a river’s streams the water of
blessing which you, Archangel, had granted, you rendered ineffectual by
your fearsome visitation.

Of old Moses struck a rock and waters gushed out; while now, when you
struck a rock, the streams of rivers were swallowed up, witnessing still
to the marvel, godlike Archangel.

Those who of old were clad in the gloom of unbelief by the folly of
idols attacking your godlike house were manifestly granted the light of
knowledge at your prayers.

Your form and fiery nature illumines believers, but consumes
unbelievers, Chief Captain of the divine ministers, defender of those
who with sincere faith sing your praise.

Imitating in all things the divine compassion of the Master, you stretch
out your hand to the humble, heal the bruises of souls and bring to an
end the pains of those who have recourse to you, Holy Archangel.

****

Theotokion.

The Prophet foresaw you as a volume in which the Word was written by the
finger of the Father, O Virgin; implore him to write down in the book of
life us who devoutly glorify you.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Model melody.

Chief Captain of God, Minister of divine glory, guide of mankind and
Prince of the Bodiless Powers, ask for what is for our good and for
God’s great mercy, as Chief Captain of the Bodiless Powers.

****

Ikos.

You said in the Scriptures, immortal Lover of mankind, that multitudes
of Angels rejoice over one person who does penance. We therefore in our
iniquities, O only sinless One who knows the heart, dare each day to
beseech you, as you compassionate, to take pity on us and send down to
us compunction, unworthy though we are, granting us pardon, Master. For
on behalf of us all there intercedes the Chief Captain of the Bodiless
Powers.

****

Synaxarion.

On the 6th of the month the Commemoration of the amazing wonder that
took place at Colossae in Phrygia through the Chief Captain Michael.

****

Verses.  

New Noë to your church, Michael, you came,  
At Chonae made an end to river’s flood.  
Michael, Chief Captain of the Angel hosts,  
Once on the sixth of the month the flow of the river he funnelled
\[chonevse\].

Consumed by envy at the marvels which took place in the church of the
Chief Captain Michael, certain pagan men planned to divert the river
which flowed nearby against the church, so as to flood the church and
destroy Archippos, the honoured man who dwelt in it. The divine
Archangel simply appeared and, telling Archippos to take courage, struck
the rock with a staff, making a passage for the river in it. From that
day to this it is visible passing through and hollowing out its passage.

On the same day the Contest of the holy Martyrs Evdoxios, Zeno, Romulus
and Makarios.

****

Verses.

  
Zeno, Evdoxios and Romulus were slain,  
So too Makarios: blessed \[makaristoi\] in their end\!

On the same day one thousand one hundred and four holy soldiers and
Saint Kalodoti met their end by the sword.

****

Verses.

  
Martyrs one thousand, ten times ten and four,  
A single end accomplished by the sword.

Her head by sword struck off, Kalodoti  
Before you stands, O Word, giver of good \[

kalon dotiri\]

On the same day the Saints Faustus the presbyter, Makarios, Andrew and
the monk Vivos, Kyriakos, Dionysios, Andronikos; and saints Andropelagia
and Thekla; and the sea captain Theoktistos and another Kyriakos the
commoner met their end by the sword.

****

Verses.

  
Faustus, when through a sword he left the earth,  
Was raised to brightness \[phavsis\] of a home on high.

When Andrew and Makarios died by sword  
Both made a journey by a blessed \[

makarios\] path.

The crown of virtue Vivos is denied

The crown of martyrdom had he not won.  
With Dionysios a sword has slain

Two who with Dionysios were of one mind.  
How bravely \[

andriki\] Andropelagia went

To execution, as did Thekla too.

Seaman Theoktistos, his head struck off,  
Steers his soul’s vessel to the vault above.

Kyriakos a commoner, but by the sword  
A fellow banqueter of Martyrs’ choir.

On the same day there coincided the dedication of the most holy Mother
of God at the Second in the house of St Irene.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7.

As he kept watch Daniel saw you standing with him making him understand
the vision he had seen at the Ubal, O Gabriel formed of lightning, and
after this showing him Michael.

In faith let us praise with mighty voice the godlike and light-bearing
guides of the Angels, Michael and Gabriel, our good comforters,
defenders and guardians.

Fair and all-comely and godlike, in spirit you became the leader of the
immaterial ministers, Michael, radiant with light. With them therefore
intercede on behalf of us all.

****

Theotokion.

Seeing the eternal Word of the supreme Mind dwelling ineffably and
fearsomely in you, O Maiden, the Archangel Gabriel cried out: Hail,
blessed throne of the Most High\!

****

Another.

When Daniel once saw you standing with him, wholly seized with
apprehension, he was afraid and approaching your feet he was made to
understand clearly the revelation of hidden mysteries, as he cried:
Blessed are you, the God of our Fathers.

Those taken away bound by attacks of nations and who, finding themselves
in far distant places, call upon you, Chief Captain of God, you bring
back again as they cry with joy: Blessed are you, the God of our
Fathers.

The choirs of Angels, perceiving you praised with love by choirs of
mortals, are filled with perpetual joy, and glorify God, who through
compassionate pity has mystically united those below with the heavens,
Archangel Michael.

What place does not share in your limitless wonders? What city does not
have you as champion? What soul of those in trouble does not call you
its helper, Chief Captain of God? as it cried out harmoniously: Blessed
are you, the God of our Fathers.

Guide of the erring, defender of the oppressed, consolation of the
faint-hearted, calmest haven of those storm-tossed by spirits, surety of
sinners, visitation of the sick, beacon of those in darkness are you,
Archangel of God.

****

Theotokion.

All-pure, Immaculate Lady, as you gave birth in the flesh to the Saviour
and God and Redeemer and Master, ever implore him that we who sing the
praise of his acts of pity beyond understanding may receive release from
dire troubles and forgiveness of many sins.

****

Ode 8.

Michael you have been declared captain of the bodiless, spiritual hosts,
saving intercessor for humans, godlike servant of God, as you sing
without ceasing: All you his works, bless, praise the Lord.

Archangels Michael and Gabriel, the two beacons all light, who guide
creation with light with the beacon fires of the Godhead, dispel the fog
of dread troubles.

As skilled pilots, O Archangels, guide safely to the haven of the divine
will the barge my soul, fallen foul and endangered by a tempest of sins.

****

Theotokion.

As bridal escort the godlike Archangel came and addressed with his
‘Hail\!’, O Bride of God without bridegroom, the glory of the Angels
and the protection and wall of defence of humans.

****

Another.

You pass through earth like lightning, fulfilling the divine will, you
traverse the heavens, leading the Angels; great is your glory, beyond
understanding the numberless wonders which fearsomely you accomplish in
all creation.

The eye-witnesses of the One who appeared in a body for our sake, Philip
the far-famed and the greatest Divine, by divine inspirations foretell
the inexhaustible grace of your healings, O First of Angels.

With a rod Moses of old divided the sea; and now the Chief Captain of
God with invisible power, as with a visible rod, channels the waters,
which flowed in disorder, into the rock as in a funnel.

The revered house of the prince of the Angels is revealed as an immense
heaven, in which by wonders as by stars all the hearts of the faithful
are illumined, as they glorify God the giver of blessings to the ages.

As once you prevented the irrational advance of Balaam by the fearful
halting of his irrational beast by a word, Commander of the Angels,
render the sons of Hagar, who are each day stirred up irrationally
against us, ineffectual by your prayers.

****

Theotokion.

You bore a fire which in no way consumed your womb, O Virgin. You gave
birth to the Word of God who delivers from unreason the words that had
obeyed the deceiver and disobeyed the God who made them and who loves
mankind.

****

Ode 9.

Behold the fair glory of your godlike house, Archangel, resplendent with
your radiant boldness. It sends forth lighting flashes of wonders and by
divine grace dispels each day the darkness of diseases.

As fair and comely yoke-fellows you serve the Masters commands for those
on earth, Archangels, delivering them from dangers and sending out to
all saving illumination by the divine Spirit.

Today the bodiless and godlike Minds rejoice with us, as they see the
great and radiant Archangel being praised by all, as he entreats for us
illumination and redemption from faults.

O godlike and shining pair, Archangels, Michael all-honoured and Gabriel
all-glorified, as you stand in the presence of the holy Trinity deliver
us from the liability of faults and from eternal punishment.

****

Theotokion.

At the voce of the Angel Gabriel you conceived God the Word, O
All-blameless, who by a word made the hosts on high and grants reason to
praise his holy condescension beyond reason and understanding.

****

Another.

As you appeared to men through the compassion of your pity, O Word, to
protect them from evil harm you appointed Angels for them, among them
Michael the wondrous. Through whom we implore you to grant us all pardon
of offences.

Every believer ever addresses you a song, who without ceasing with many
tens of thousands in the highest raise the thrice-holy hymn. Bring us
all to God, rescuing us from disasters and toils, O prince of Angels.

Let creation leap for joy as it mystically sings the praise of the great
Archangel of the Lord; for he is the guide of the erring and haven for
many who are storm-tossed by disasters and temptations, physician of the
sick and fount of wonders.

You have hallowed this revered temple and revealed it as a source of
wonders, in which we stand together and cry out with faith: O Archangel,
ask for us release from sins, deliverance from disasters and great calm.

****

Theotokion.

You appeared wider than the heavens, O Virgin, for in a manner beyond
explanation you contained God, whom the choirs of Bodiless Powers
mystically praise. Implore him, pure Maiden, that we who call you
blessed with never silent voices may all be saved.

****

Exapostilarion. Women hear.

All humanity, assemble together and see; contemplate the strange wonder
that has been accomplished in Chonae. Michael, the bodiless one, split
the rock with a staff and speared rivers that were flowing down
unchecked to become holy water.

****

Theotokion. Same melody.

Alas, wretch that I am, through my incontinence of old I was thrust from
the greater image in which I shared by God’s action. But you, O Christ,
in your compassion, ineffably became my fellow and shared that which
worse, renewing me, O Saviour, from virgin blood.

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Stichera, and sing Prosomia.  
Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

As we in the world keep festival like the Angels, let us cry aloud to
God, who is borne on a throne of glory, the hymn: Holy are you, Father
in heaven; co-eternal Word, holy are you; and the All-holy Spirit. (

**Twice**)

With great boldness you lead the heavenly powers and stand before the
throne unendurable in glory, eye-witness of things ineffable; by your
intercessions, Michael Chief Captain, save us who are constrained by
dangers and temptations, we implore.

Manifestly you are first of the bodiless Angels and minister of that
divine radiance, eye-witness and initiate; save us, Michael Chief
Captain, who yearly honour you devoutly and faithfully sing the praise
of the Trinity.

Glory.

**Tone 5.**

Where your grace overshadows, Archangel, from there the power of the
devil is driven out; the Morning Star who fell cannot bear to remain in
your light. And so we beg you, by your mediation quench his fiery darts
which are hurled against us, rescuing us from his stumbling blocks,
Michael Archangel worthy of praise.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We faithful call you blessed, Virgin Mother of God, and we glorify you
as is fitting, the unshakeable city, the unbreachable wall, the
impregnable defence and refuge of our souls.

****

Great Doxology and Dismissal.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

