\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ Akathist \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

# canon of the akathist

## INTRODUCTION

The Canon of the Akathist is sung on the Saturday of the Akathist during
Great Lent, but it also used when the Akathist is sung at Small Compline
on the Fridays of Lent in Greek parishes.

This translation makes no attempt to reproduce either the metre or the
acrostic of the original.

I have added a number of references to many of the biblical passages
used or alluded to in the text.

-----

**CANON OF THE AKATHIST**

A Composition of Joseph the Hymnographer

The Acrostic, without the Irmi, is:  
Vessel of joy, to you alone ‘Hail\!’ belongs.

Ode 1. Tone 4. Irmos.

I will open my mouth[\[1\]](#_ftn1) and it will be filled with the
Spirit, and I will utter a word[\[2\]](#_ftn2) for the Queen and Mother,
and I shall be seen keeping glad festival, and rejoicing I will sing her
wonders.

Troparia.

Pure Virgin, living book of Christ, sealed by the Spirit[\[3\]](#_ftn3),
beholding you the great Archangel cried to you, ‘Hail, vessel of joy\!
Through which the curse of our first mother[\[4\]](#_ftn4) will be
abolished’.

Hail, Virgin bride of God, restoration of Adam and death of hell\! Hail,
All-unblemished, palace of the only King\! Hail, fiery
throne[\[5\]](#_ftn5) of the Almighty\!

Hail, from whom alone there sprung the unfading Rose\! Hail, you who
gave birth to the sweet‑smelling Apple\! Hail, nosegay of the King of
all, unwedded preservation of the world.

Hail, treasure‑house of purity, through whom we have been raised from
our fall\! Hail, Sovereign Lady, lily[\[6\]](#_ftn6) whose sweet scent
perfumes the faithful; fragrant incense and myrrh of great
price[\[7\]](#_ftn7).

Ode 3. Irmos.

O Mother of God, as living and ungrudging source, establish those united
in spiritual fellowship who sing you hymns of praise, and in your divine
glory grant them crowns of glory.

Troparia.

From you, as land untilled, grew the divine Ear of corn. Hail, living
Table that held the Bread of Life\![\[8\]](#_ftn8) Hail, Sovereign Lady,
never failing spring of the living Water[\[9\]](#_ftn9).

Heifer, who gave birth for the faithful to the unblemished sacrificial
Victim,[\[10\]](#_ftn10) hail\! Hail, Ewe-lamb that bore the Lamb of
God, who takes away the sins of all the world\![\[11\]](#_ftn11) Hail,
fervent mercy‑seat\![\[12\]](#_ftn12)

Hail, radiant dawn, who alone bears Christ the Sun\! Hail,
dwelling‑place of the Light\! Hail, you that dispersed the gloom and
utterly destroyed the demons of the darkness.

Hail, only gate through which the Word alone has
passed\![\[13\]](#_ftn13) By your birth giving, Sovereign Lady, you
smashed the bars and gates[\[14\]](#_ftn14) of Hell. Hail, All-praised,
divine entrance of the saved\!

Ode 4. Irmos.

The One seated in glory on the throne of the Godhead,[\[15\]](#_ftn15)
Jesus, the One above all godhead, has come on a light
cloud[\[16\]](#_ftn16) and with his unsullied hand has saved those who
cry: ‘Glory, O Christ, to your power\!’

Troparia.

With voices of song in faith we cry aloud to you, O Virgin worthy of all
praise, ‘Hail, rich mountain, curdled by the Spirit\![\[17\]](#_ftn17)
Hail, Lampstand[\[18\]](#_ftn18) and Vessel bearing the
Manna[\[19\]](#_ftn19) that sweetens the senses of the godly\!’

Mercy‑seat[\[20\]](#_ftn20) of the world, hail, Lady undefiled\! Hail,
Ladder raising all from earth by grace\![\[21\]](#_ftn21) Hail, Bridge
that has truly brought over from death to life all those who sing your
praises .

Hail, Immaculate, higher than the heavens, who without birth-­pangs
carried in your womb the Foundation of the earth\! Hail, sea‑shell that
from your blood dyed a robe of divine purple for the king of Powers.

Hail, Sovereign Lady, who in truth gave birth to the Lawgiver who freely
washes clean the transgressions of all\! Depth unsearchable, who did not
know wedlock, height above all speech, through whom we have been made
divine.

You wove for the world a crown not woven by human hand, and we sing your
praises, as we cry aloud, ‘Hail to you, Virgin, the guardian of all,
fortress and stronghold and sacred refuge\!’

Ode 5. Irmos.

The universe was amazed at your divine glory, for you, O Virgin, who did
not know wedlock, held in your womb the God over all and gave birth to
an eternal Son, who gives salvation as the prize to all who sing your
praise.

## Troparia.

Hail, All‑blame­less, who bore the Way[\[22\]](#_ftn22) of life, who
saved the world from the flood[\[23\]](#_ftn23) of sin\! Hail, Bride of
God, tidings fearful to tell and hear\! Hail, dwelling ­place of the
Master of Creation\!

Hail, Undefiled, the strength and fortress of humankind, place of
sanctification of the Glory\![\[24\]](#_ftn24) Hail, slayer of hell,
bridal chamber full of light\! Hail, joy of the angel\! Hail, succour of
those who call on you with faith\!

Fiery chariot[\[25\]](#_ftn25) of the Word, hail, Sovereign Lady, living
Paradise, having in your midst the Lord, the Tree of
Life\![\[26\]](#_ftn26) His sweetness gives life to all who partake with
faith, who had bowed beneath corruption.

Strengthened by your might, we raise our cry to you with faith, ‘Hail,
city of the King of all\![\[27\]](#_ftn27) Glorious things and worthy to
be heard are plainly spoken of you.[\[28\]](#_ftn28) Hail, mountain not
cut by human hand,[\[29\]](#_ftn29) depth that none can fathom\!

Hail, Undefiled, spacious tabernacle of the Word, shell which put forth
the divine Pearl\! Hail, Mother of God full of wonders, reconciliation
with God of all those in every age that call you blessed\!

Ode 6. Irmos.

Come, godly-minded people, as we celebrate this divine and honoured
feast of the Mother of God, let us clap our hands as we glorify the God
who was born from her.

Troparia.

Spotless bridal chamber of the Word, cause of the deification of all,
hail, All-immaculate, the resonance of the Prophets\! Hail, the
adornment of the Apostles\!

From you dropped down the dew that quenched the flame of idolatry. We
therefore cry to you, ‘Hail, Virgin, Fleece wet with dew that Gideon saw
in prophecy\!’ [\[30\]](#_ftn30)

See, to you we cry ‘Hail\!’ Be our haven as we toss upon the deep, our
anchorage in the ocean of afflictions and all the snares of the enemy.

Cause of joy, endue our thoughts with grace that we may cry to you,
‘Hail, Bush unburned,[\[31\]](#_ftn31) Cloud all of light that without
ceasing **** overshadows the faithful\![\[32\]](#_ftn32)

Ode 7. Irmos.

The godlike Youths did not worship creation instead of the Creator, but
bravely trampling on the threat of fire, rejoicing they sang, ‘O highly
exalted Lord and God of our fathers, blessed are you\!’[\[33\]](#_ftn33)

Troparia.

We sing your praises, crying, ‘Hail\! chariot of the spiritual Sun; true
Vine that has produced the ripe Cluster of grapes,[\[34\]](#_ftn34) from
which there flows a wine making glad the souls of the faithful, as they
give you glory.

Hail, Bride of God, who bore the Healer of all; mystical Staff that
blossomed with the unfading Flower\![\[35\]](#_ftn35) Hail, Sovereign
Lady, through you we are filled with joy and inherit life\!

No tongue, however eloquent, Sovereign Lady, has strength to sing your
praise. You have been exalted above the Seraphim, for you bore Christ
the King. Entreat him now to deliver from **** all harm those who
worship you in faith.

The ends of the earth praise you and call you blessed, and they cry to
you, ‘Hail, pure Virgin, scroll on which the Word has been written by
the Father’s finger\![\[36\]](#_ftn36) Entreat him,  Mother of God, to
inscribe your servants in the Book of Life.

We your servants entreat you, and bend the knee of our heart. Incline
your ear and save us, Mother of God, for we are drowning in afflictions;
and preserve your City from all capture by enemies.

Ode 8. Irmos.

The Offspring of the Mother of God saved the innocent Youths in the
furnace. Then he was prefigured, but now in reality he gathers the whole
world which sings, ‘Praise the Lord, his works, and highly exalt him to
all the ages.’[\[37\]](#_ftn37)

## Troparia.

You received the Word within your womb, and you carried him who carries
all things. You fed with milk him who by his will alone feeds all the
inhabited earth. To him, pure Virgin, we sing, ‘All you works of the
Lord, praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Moses perceived in the burning bush the great mystery of your giving
birth, holy and immaculate Virgin;[\[38\]](#_ftn38) and the Youths
pre­figured this most clearly as they stood in the midst of the fire
and were not burned. Therefore we sing your praise to all the ages.

We who once were stripped naked through deception,[\[39\]](#_ftn39) have
been clothed by your childbearing in the robe of incorruption; and we
who once sat in the darkness of transgressions have seen the
Light,[\[40\]](#_ftn40) O Maiden, dwelling‑place of Light. Therefore we
sing your praise to all the ages.

Through you the dead are given life,[\[41\]](#_ftn41) for you bore the
One who is life in person. Those once called dumb speak eloquently,
lepers are cleansed, diseases driven out; the multitudes of the spirits
of the air are conquered, O Virgin, salvation of
mortals.[\[42\]](#_ftn42)

You gave birth to salvation for the world, pure Virgin, and through you
we have been raised from earth to heaven. Hail, All‑blessed, protection
and defence, rampart and stronghold of those who sing,  ‘All you works
of the Lord, praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Ode 9. Irmos.

Let all born of earth, bearing torches, in spirit leap for joy; let the
nature of the immaterial Minds keep festival as it honours the sacred
festival of the Mother of God, and let it cry, ‘Hail, all-blessed Mother
of God, pure and Ever-Virgin\!’

Troparia.

That we believers, who through you, O Maiden, have become partakers of
everlasting joy, may cry to you, ‘Hail\!’, deliver us from
temptation,[\[43\]](#_ftn43) from capture by the enemy, and from every
other ill that comes on sinful mortals because of the multitude of their
transgressions.

You have been revealed as our enlightenment and confirmation, and so we
cry to you, ‘Hail, never‑setting star that brings into the world the
mighty Sun\! Hail, pure Virgin who opened Eden that was
shut\![\[44\]](#_ftn44) Hail, Pillar of fire,[\[45\]](#_ftn45) leading
humanity to the life on high\!’

Let us stand with reverence in the house of our God, and let us cry
aloud, ‘Hail, Sovereign Lady of the world\! Hail, Mary, Lady over all\!
Hail, you who alone are blameless and fair among women\! Hail, vessel
that received the inexhaustible Myrrh, emptied out upon you\!

Hail, Ever‑Virgin, dove that bore the Merciful\! Hail, glory of all the
Saints, crown of the Champions\! Hail, divine adornment of all the Just
and salvation of us the faithful.

Spare your inheritance, O God, disregarding all our sins. For this you
have interceding with you her who on earth conceived you without seed,
when in your great mercy, O Christ, you willed to be shaped in a form
that was not your own.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Psalm 77:2

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Psalm 44:1

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Isaias 29:11

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) cf. Gen. 3:16

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) cf. Dan. 7:9

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) cf. Song of Songs 2:1-2

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) cf. John 12:3

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Exodus 25:23-30

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) cf. John 7:38

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) cf. Luke 15:23

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) cf. John 1:29

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Exodus 25:17-22, Romans 3:25, Hebrews 9:5

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Ezekiel 44:1-3

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Psalm 106:16

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) cf. Isaias 6:1

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Isaias 19:1

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Psalm 67:17

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Exodus 25:31-40

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Hebrews 9:4

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Exodus 25:17-22, Romans 3:25, Hebrews 9:5

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) Gen. 28:10-17

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) John14:6

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) cf. Gen. 6-9

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) cf. Ezekiel 3:12

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) cf. 3 Kingd. 2:11, Ezekiel 1

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) Gen. 2:9, 3:22-24, Apocalypse 2:7, 22:2.22

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) Psalm 47:3

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Psalm 86:3

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) Daniel 2:34

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) cf. Judges 5:4, 6:36-40, Daniel 3:50

[\[31\]](#_ftnref31) Exodus 3:1-6

[\[32\]](#_ftnref32) Exodus 13:21 etc., Sirach 24:4

[\[33\]](#_ftnref33) Daniel 3

[\[34\]](#_ftnref34) Numbers 13:23-24

[\[35\]](#_ftnref35) Numbers 17:1-11, Hebrews 9:4

[\[36\]](#_ftnref36) cf. Isaias 8:1, Phil. 3:5, Apoc. 3:5, 13:8, 20:12,
21:27

[\[37\]](#_ftnref37) Daniel 3

[\[38\]](#_ftnref38) Exodus 3:1-6

[\[39\]](#_ftnref39) Gen. 3:7

[\[40\]](#_ftnref40) Luke 1:79, Psalm 35:10

[\[41\]](#_ftnref41) cf. John 5:21

[\[42\]](#_ftnref42) cf. Luke 7:22

[\[43\]](#_ftnref43) cf. Matthew 6:13

[\[44\]](#_ftnref44) Gen. 3:24

[\[45\]](#_ftnref45) Exodus 13:21-22

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

