\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](theodore.md) \] \[ To the Nun Anna \]
\[ [Two Letters from Exile](exile-epp.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 2](ths02.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 4](ths04.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 6](ths06.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 7](ths07.md) \]
\[ [Large Catechesis 14](ths14l.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 20](ths20.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 24](ths24.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 32](ths32.md) \]
\[ [Lent](lent.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 78](Ths78.md) \]

 

## INTRODUCTION

This letter, Book 1,42 \[PG 1061-1063\], which might perhaps be entitled
‘How to Pray’, appears to be addressed to a widow, possibly a wealthy
one, who has adopted a monastic way of life, though ‘nun’ is perhaps
rather too formal as a translation of the Greek ‘monazousa’.

-----

## LETTERS BOOK I  
42

**To the Nun Anna**

I thought that my blessed mother had died; but, it seems, she is still
on earth. For what more could she have done than you in showing me a
mother’s care? But though I am a sinner, I trust in the Lord that he
will repay you with no ordinary grace for what you have done for my
unworthiness and grant you the attainment of what you long and ask for.
But enough of what has been done. For I dealt with all that in my
previous letter. But you, on the other hand, have increased rather than
exhausted your generosity. And so how could we not now remember your
piety. With clothes, a sacred offering, food and drink you have
astounded us from every side. So now put an stop to your gifts, and be
confident of your reward from God. For he was no liar who said that he
rewards even a cup of cold water. \[Cf. Matthew 10,42\]

You say you are grieved by your concern for your child, which leaves you
no leisure for the necessary care for the soul. But God is perfectly
well able to look after the affairs of the good child and to let you
have leisure in all things to occupy yourself with what is profitable
for the soul, so as to dispose you with a ready heart for your departure
from the body. You are not able, because of the sickly condition of your
body, to fast and afflict yourself harshly. Bear this without grieving,
bringing what you can to the Lord and filling up what you lack in
ascetic practices by an abundance of humility.

You ask to be taught how you ought to pray. The Lord himself taught us
this through the invocation ‘Our Father’, and that we should not ask for
anything temporary, but for his kingdom and eternal justice. Moreover it
has been ordained by the Fathers that first should come thanksgiving to
God; next confession of our sins to him; and so a request for their
forgiveness, and intercession for the other things that bring salvation.

So, when you are about to pray, give thanks to the Lord and Master that
he brought you out of nothing into existence; that he redeemed you from
every error, calling you and counting you worthy to become a partaker in
the knowledge of himself, free from pagan, free from heretical error.
Next that he prepared you for the monastic life, which equals that of
the Angels, after the enjoyment of life in the world. The thought of all
this is enough to soften the soul to compunction and the outpouring of
tears. From all this comes enlightenment of heart, sweetness of spirit,
desire for God. When this is present in the heart, there comes the
rejection of every evil. When you have thus given thanks to God, confess
to him like this, ‘You know, Master, how many sins I have committed
against you, and how many I commit each hour’, as you reckon up this sin
and this offence and the ones committed in knowledge and in ignorance.
But do not recall in any detail the ones that by being clearly
remembered harm the soul. \[Cf. The Ladder ** 28,58\] And from this the
grace of humility will dawn for you, with a broken heart \[Cf. Psalm
50,18\] and fear of God’s recompense. After this, ask, groan, implore
your Lord for forgiveness of these sins and strengthening for the future
to please him, saying, ‘My Lord, Lord, may I no longer anger you, may I
no longer love anything but you, alone truly to be loved. And should I
anger you again, falling down I implore your compassion, that I may be
given strength from now on to please you.’ And if anything else comes to
your mind that is good to be accomplished, ask for it fervently. And
after this call upon the holy Mother of God to have mercy on you, the
holy Angels, and the Angel you have as the guardian of your life, that
he may watch over you and protect you, the Forerunner and the holy
Apostles, all the Saints and those whom you usually call on especially,
and the one whose memory is kept that day. These then are the things, it
seems to me, which hold the power of prayer, even if each person
doubtless prays with other words and not the same as these, because
people who pray do not always say the same things themselves, but the
power, as I reckon, is always the same. So may you be kept safe as you
pray for what is necessary, and become better each day, and through a
strict way of life present your entire self well-pleasing to the Lord.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

