\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](john-dam.md) \]
\[ [Antipascha](thomcan.md) \] \[ First Canon for the Assumption \]
\[ [Second Canon for Pentecost](pentcan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan.md) \] \[ [Symeon Stylites](symeon.md) \]
\[ [Protomartyr Thekla](TheklaCan.md) \] \[ [Pascha](PaschaCan.md) \]
\[ [Paschal Canon with Notes](paschal_canon_with_notes.md) \]

****INTRODUCTION****

**The canon is by St John of Damascus, who borrows much of his imagery
from the Old and New Testaments. Some of the texts used, apart from the
account in Acts 1, are Psalm 23,7-10, Ezekiel 1,19, Ephesians 2,6, *He
raised us up with him and seated us with him in the heavenly places in
Christ Jesus*, Hebrews 1,3; 12,2, Apocalypse 3,21. The opening troparion
of the first Ode makes use of Psalm 17,11, *He mounted on the Cherubim
and he flew, he flew on the wings of the winds*,. The Fathers explain
that, just as the two Angels appeared in human form so that they would
be visible to the Apostles, so the Cherubim appeared in the form of a
cloud to carry Christ to heaven. As St John Chrysostom says, *For the
Son a royal throne was sent, and not simply a royal throne, but that of
the Father himself. For Isaias says of the Father, ‘See, the Lord sits
on a light cloud’. Since then the Father sits on a cloud, therefore he
also sent a cloud for the Son.***

**Throughout the canon St John stresses the fact that by Christ’s
assumption in his humanity, *in the flesh*, our human nature has entered
and been glorified in heaven.**

**In Ode 7 the poet interprets the lost sheep of the parable \[Luke 15,
4-6\] as an image of fallen human nature, an image which is also to be
found in the *Dogmatikon* in Tone 4. The same idea is found in St
Gregory of Nyssa, *The One who shepherds the whole rational creation,
leaving behind the unerring and supernatural flock in the heights, in
his love for humanity goes in search of the erring sheep (I mean our
nature).***

**There are problems with the text of the canon and St Nikodemos points
out that five of the *Theotokia* and a number of troparia in some of the
Odes are not to be found in the manuscript *Pentecostaria.* There is
evidence elsewhere that *Theotokia* were often standard ones that fitted
the melody of the *Irmos* and were not specially written for particular
canons.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

****CANON FOR THE ASSUMPTION****

**Ode 1. Tone 5. Irmos.**

To God the Saviour who guided the people in the sea dry-shod, and
drowned Pharao with all his host, to him alone let us sing: for he has
been glorified.

**Troparia.**

All peoples, let us sing a song of victory to Christ who has been taken
up with glory on the shoulders of the Cherubim, and seated us at the
Father’s right hand; for he has been glorified.

The choirs of Angels were astounded when they saw Christ, the mediator
between God and humankind in the highest with his flesh, while with one
voice they sang a hymn of victory.

To God, who appeared on mount Sinai and gave the law to Moses, who saw
God, and who was taken up in the flesh from the mount of Olives, let us
all sing; for he has been glorified.

**Theotokion.**

Immaculate Mother of God, without ceasing implore the God who was
incarnate from you, yet did not depart from the bosom of his Begetter,
to save from every calamity those whom he fashioned.

**Ode 3. Irmos.**

By the power of your Cross, O Christ, establish my understanding to hymn
and glorify your saving Assumption.

**Troparia.**

O Christ, Giver of life, lover of humankind, you went up to the Father
and exalted our race in your ineffable compassion.

The ranks of Angels, as they saw your mortal nature going up with you, O
Saviour, were astounded and without ceasing sang your praise.

The choirs of Angels were amazed, O Christ, as they saw you being taken
up with your body, and they sang the praise of your holy Assumption.

Human nature, which had fallen by corruption, you raised up, O Christ,
and by your ascension you exalted and glorified us with yourself.

**Theotokion.**

Intercede unceasingly, pure Lady, with him who came forth from your
womb, that those who praise you as Mother of God may be delivered from
the deceit of the Devil.

**Ode 4. Irmos.**

I have heard, Lord, the report of the might of your Cross, how Paradise
was opened through it, and I cried out: Glory to your power, O Lord.

**Troparia.**

You were taken up in glory, King of the Angels, to send us the Comforter
from the Father. And so we cry out: Glory, O Christ, to your Assumption!

As the Saviour had ascended to the Father with his flesh, the hosts of
Angels were struck with amazement, and cried out: Glory, O Christ, to
your Assumption!

The angelic Powers cried out to those above: Lift up the gates for
Christ, our King; whose praise we sing, together with the Father and the
Spirit.

**Theotokion.**

The Virgin gave birth, and did not know a mother’s pangs; but Mother she
is, while Virgin she remained. Singing her praise we cry: Hail, Mother
of God!

**Ode 5. Irmos.**

Rising at dawn, we cry to you, O Lord: Save us; for you are our God; we
know no other but you.

**Troparia.**

When you had filled the universe with gladness, merciful Lord, you took
your place with your flesh among the powers on high.

The angelic powers, as they saw you being lifted up, cried out: Lift up
the gates for our King!

The Apostles, as the saw the Saviour being raised up, cried out with
fear: Glory to you, our King!

**Theotokion.**

Mother of God, we praise you as Virgin after childbirth; for you bore
for the world God the Word in flesh.

**Ode 6. Irmos.**

The deep closed round me, the whale became my burial; but I cried out to
you, Lover of mankind, and your right hand saved me, O Lord.

**Troparia.**

On seeing the Creator lifted up on high today, the Apostles leaped for
joy in hope of the Spirit, and in fear they cried: Glory to your ascent!

The Angels came and cried out, O Christ, to your Disciples: In the way
that you have seen Christ going up, he will come in the flesh as just
Judge of all.

As the heavenly powers saw you, our Saviour, lifted up to the heights
with your body, they cried out, saying: Great, Master, is your love for
humankind.

**Theotokion.**

as Bush unburned, mountain, living ladder and heavenly gate, fittingly
we glorify you, glorious Mary, boast of the orthodox.

**Ode 7. Irmos**

You saved the Youths who hymned you in the furnace of fire; blessed are
you, the God of our fathers.

**Troparia**

You were taken up on a cloud of light and saved the world; blessed are
you the God of our fathers.

Lifting up on your shoulders the nature which had been led astray, O
Christ, you were taken up and brought it to God the Father.

You ascended in the flesh to the bodiless Father; blessed are you the
God of our fathers.

Lifting up our nature which had been slain by sin, O Saviour, you
brought it to your own Father.

**Theotokion.**

You were born from a Virgin, whom you made Mother of God; blessed are
you the God of our fathers.

**Ode 8. Irmos**

The Son and God, begotten of the Father before the ages, and incarnate
in the last times of a Virgin Mother, you priests praise, people highly
exalt to all the ages.

**Troparia.**

Christ, the giver of life, who rose in his two natures with glory to
heaven and is now seated with the Father, you priests praise, you people
highly exalt to all the ages.

Saviour, who redeemed creation from the slavery of idols and set it free
before your own Father, we praise you and highly exalt you to all the
ages.

The One who by his descent threw down the opponent and by his ascent
exalted humankind, you priests praise, you people highly exalt to all
the ages.

**Theotokion.**

You were revealed, pure Mother of God, as higher than the Cherubim, for
you carried in your womb the One who rides upon them; whom with the
bodiless powers we mortals glorify to all the ages.

**Ode 9. Irmos**

As Mother of God, who beyond understanding and reason ineffably bore in
time the timeless, we faithful magnify you with one accord.

**Troparia**

As they watched you, the redeemer of the world, Christ God, being
divinely exalted, the Apostles leapt for joy and magnified you with awe.

As the Angels saw your flesh now made divine, O Christ, in the height,
they signalled to one another: Truly this is our God.

As the ranks of bodiless powers, Christ God, saw you being raised on
clouds, they cried: For the King of glory lift up the gates.

As the One who descended into the lowest part of the earth and saved
mankind, and raised it up by your ascension, we magnify you.

**Theotokion.**

Hail, Mother of God, Mother of Christ God; as to-day you saw him whom
you bore flying up from earth, with Angels you magnified him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
