\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ Second Canon for the Assumption \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ [Akathist](akathist.md) \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

**INTRODUCTION**

The current *Pentecostarion* gives St Joseph of Thessaloniki as the
author of this canon, but St Nikodemos in his commentary is emphatic
that the author is St Joseph the Hymnographer \[Died 886\], whom he
describes as the ’most hymnographical of hymnographers’. He writes, ’I
mean Joseph, not the Bishop of Thessaloniki, the brother of St Theodore
the Studite, … but Joseph who came from Sicily and who honoured numerous
Saints with the canons that are contained in the *Menaia*.’

St Joseph naturally uses many of the same biblical texts as St John, but
he also employs other texts, such as Psalm 46, *God has gone up with a
shout of joy, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet*, and Isaias 45,8
*Let Heaven on high be glad, and let the clouds rain justice*, and 63,1,
*Who is this who comes from Edom, the red of his garments from Bosor?*
In the Aposticha of Vespers, where the same text is used, the name Bosor
is taken to mean ’flesh’, an interesting, if mistaken, piece of Hebrew
etymology, and the same is implied in Ode 6 of this canon.

I have not attempted to reproduce either of the acrostics.

-----

****CANON FOR THE FEAST OF THE ASSUMPTION****

**The Acrostic is the alphabet,  
but in the 8th and 9th Odes:**  
JOSEPH’S ODE.

**Ode 1. Tone 4. I will open my mouth.**

Immortal by nature, you arose on the third day and appeared to the
Eleven and to all the Disciples, and riding on a cloud you hastened back
to the Father, O Christ, Maker of the universe.

David, inspired by God, in his song cried out most plainly, ’The Lord
has gone up to the heavenly places with a shout of joy and the blast of
the trumpet, and come to the Father, source of light’.

When by your passion and your rising, Lord, you had made new a world
grown old through many sins, you ascended, riding on a cloud, to the
heavenly places. Glory to your glory\!

**Theotokion.**

All-spotless Lady, you bore the Master of all, who accepted the
voluntary passion and has gone back to his own Father; whom he had not
left, even though he had taken flesh.

**Ode 3. O Mother of God.**

Lift up the heavenly gates, for see, Christ the King and Lord, wearing
his earthly body, is at hand, said the powers below to those above.

When you had sought out Adam, who had been led astray by the deceit of
the serpent, O Christ, as you had clothed yourself in him, you ascended
and took your seat as equal sovereign on the Father’s right hand, while
the Angels sang your praise.

The earth keeps festival and dances, and heaven rejoices at the
Assumption today of the maker of creation, who by his will has clearly
united things which were separated.

**Theotokion.**

All-pure Virgin mother, who gave birth to the Destroyer of death, the
only immortal God, ever implore him to slay the passions which have put
me to death and save me.

**Ode 4. The One seated in glory.**

Jesus the Giver of life, taking those he loved, ascended the mount of
Olives and blessed them and, riding on a cloud, he came to the Father’s
bosom, which he had never left.

The whole world, visible and invisible, keeps the feast with gladness;
Angels and humans leap for joy as they glorify without ceasing the
Assumption of the One who by his goodness was united to us in the flesh.

Having abolished the might of death as immortal Lord, you granted
immortality to all, O Lover of humankind, and you were taken up in
glory, as your revered Disciples watched you, Jesu all-powerful.

**Theotokion.**

Blessed has your womb become, All-blameless Lady, for you were found
worthy to contain beyond explanation the One who marvellously emptied
the belly of Hell. Implore him to save us who sing your praise.

**Ode 5. The universe was amazed.**

When you had slain death by your death, Lord, you took those whom you
loved and ascended the holy mount of Olives, and from there you hastened
back to your Begetter, O Christ, riding on a cloud.

Strange was your Birth, strange your Resurrection, strange and fearful
your divine Assumption from the mount, O Giver of life, of which Elias
was an icon when he went up in a four-horse chariot, singing your
praise, O Lover of mankind.

Angels spoke to the Apostles as they watched: Men of Galilee, why are
you amazed at the Assumption of Christ the Giver of life? He will come
again to earth to judge the whole world, as most just Judge.

**Theotokion.**

Christ, who kept you Virgin after your giving birth without corruption,
Mother of God, ascends to the Father, whom he never left, even though he
took from you flesh with both mind and soul through his ineffable mercy.

**Ode 6. Come godly-minded people.**

Let the clouds rain down for us eternal gladness from above; for Christ,
riding on a cloud as on the Cherubim, today ascends to his Father.

Appearing in the likeness of flesh, you brought together in one things
that were formerly separated, O Lover of humankind; and as your
Disciples watched you, O Merciful, you were taken up to the heavenly
places.

Why are the garments red of the One who was united to the solidity of
flesh? said the holy Angels, as they saw Christ bearing the divine marks
of his precious passion.

**Theotokion.**

Pure Maiden, we hymn your conceiving, we hymn your ineffable giving
birth, through which we have been delivered from the destruction, the
wickedness and the gloomy incarceration of Hell.

**Ode 7. The godlike Youths did not worship.**

A cloud of light received you, Lord, who are light, as you were being
taken up beyond understanding from earth; and heavenly multitudes with
the Apostles praised you, saying: O God, blessed are you.

Let us all gladly clap our hands at Christ’s Assumption, and let us
shout with joy: The Lord has gone up with the sound of the trumpet and,
as equal in majesty with the Father, taken his seat on his right hand to
the ages.

Great Moses of old chanted and cried out: Let the Angels of heaven
worship Christ as he ascends as King of all. To him we cry: Lord and God
of our Fathers, blessed are you.

**Theotokion.**

O marvellous wonders\! How did you, O full of God’s grace, contain the
uncontainable God, who made himself poor according to the flesh, and
today with great glory has been taken up to heavenly places and given
life to humankind.

**Ode 8. The Offspring of the Mother of God**

The Intelligences appeared to the Apostles at the Assumption and said:
Why do you stand gazing and amazed? He who is ascending into heaven will
also come again to judge mankind on earth, for he alone is judge.

Let us give majesty to God; let us cry aloud with one accord; let us
sing; let us dance and let us clap our hands. Our God has gone up from
earth to heaven, as Angels and Archangels sing his praise as Master and
Maker of all things.

Our nature, which of old had fallen, has been raised above the Angels
and beyond understanding established on God’s throne. Come, let us keep
festival and let us cry out: You his works, praise the Lord, and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

**Theotokion.**

See, Mother of God, your Son, having despoiled death by his Cross, rose
on the third day, and having shown himself to his Disciples he has
hastened to the heavenly places; as we worship you with him, we give
praise and glory to all the ages.

**Ode 9. Let all born of earth.**

**Megalynarion:** Angels, seeing the ascent of the Master, were amazed
at how he was raised with glory from earth to things above.

O gifts beyond understanding\! O dread mystery\! For the Master of all
things, rising from earth to heaven, sent to his Disciples the Holy
Spirit, who enlightened their minds and set them afire with grace.

**Megalynarion:** Angels, seeing the ascent of the Master, were amazed
at how he was raised with glory from earth to things above.

To the band of Disciples the Lord said: Stay in Jerusalem, and I shall
send you another Advocate, equal in majesty with the Father, and equal
in honour with me, whom you see being taken up and riding upon a cloud
of light.

**Megalynarion:** Angels, seeing the ascent of the Master, were amazed
at how he was raised with glory from earth to things above.

The majesty of him who became poor in the flesh has been raised above
the heavens and our fallen nature honoured by sitting with the Father.
Let us keep festival and all cry aloud with one accord, and gladly clap
our hands.

**Theotokion.**

The Light which shone from Light dawned from you, dispelled all the
blackness of atheism and led to the light those who slept in night; and
so, as is fitting, to the ages we ever call you blessed.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

