\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \] \[ Baptism \]
\[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \]
\[ [Consecration of a Church](dedic-int.md) \]
\[ [Liturgy of Saint James](lit-james.md) \]
\[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \]
\[ [Canon for Confession](canon_for_confession.md) \]
\[ [Presanctified](presanctified.md) \]
\[ [Ordinations](ordinations.md) \]

ORDER THAT TAKES PLACE BEFORE  
HOLY BAPTISM

PRAYER FOR MAKING A CATECHUMEN

The Priest unties the girdle of the one who is about to be enlightened
and divests them of outer clothing and shoes. He stands them facing
East, wearing only a tunic, unbelted, bareheaded and unshod, with the
hands down. He breathes on their face three times, signs the forehead
and breast three times and places his hand on their head as he says the
following Prayer:

In your name, Lord God of truth, and that of your Only-Begotten Son and
your Holy Spirit, I place my hand on the head of your servant N., who
has been counted worthy to take refuge in your holy Name and to be
guarded under the shelter of your wings. Remove from him/her that
ancient error and fill him/her with faith in you, and hope and love, so
that he/she may know that you alone are God, true God, and your
Only-Begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and your Holy Spirit. Grant
that he/she may walk in your commandments and preserve those things that
are pleasing to you, for if someone does them, they will live by them.
Inscribe him/her in your book of life and unite him/her to the flock of
your inheritance. Let your holy Name and that of your beloved Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ and of your life-giving Spirit, be glorified in
him/her. Let your eyes remain ever fixed in mercy on him/her, and your
ears to hear the voice of his/her supplication. Make him/her glad in the
works of his/her hands and in all his/her race, that he/she may confess
you, worshipping and glorifying your great and most high Name, and may
praise you throughout all the days of his/her life. For every power of
heaven sings your praise, and yours is the glory, of the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

FIRST EXORCISM

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.

People:* *Lord, have mercy.

Priest:  
The Lord rebukes you, O Devil, the Lord who came into the world and
dwelt among mortals so that he might destroy your tyranny and deliver
humanity; the Lord who on the Tree crushed the hostile powers, when the
sun was darkened, the earth shaken, the graves opened and the bodies of
Saints arose; the Lord who by death abolished death and destroyed the
one who had the power of death, that is you, the Devil. I adjure you by
God, who revealed the tree of life and set in place the Cherubim and the
flaming sword which turned this way and that to guard it: Be rebuked and
withdraw\! I adjure you by the One who walked on the surface of the sea
as on dry land and rebuked the tempest of the winds, the One whose gaze
dries up the deeps and whose curse melts mountains. For it is he who now
commands you, through us: Be afraid, come out, withdraw from this
creature and return no more. Do not hide in him/her, nor encounter
him/her, nor influence him/her either by night or day, early or at noon.
But go back to your own Tartarus until the great day of the judgement
that has been prepared. Be afraid of God, who is seated upon the
Cherubim and looks upon the deeps; before whom Angels, Archangels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Authorities, Powers, the many-eyed
Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim tremble; before whom heaven and
earth, the sea and all that is in them tremble. Come out, and withdraw
from the sealed and newly-enlisted soldier of Christ our God. For it is
by him that I adjure you, the One who walks on the wings of the winds,
who makes his Angels spirits and his ministers a flaming fire. Come out,
and withdraw from this creature with all your power and your angels. For
the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit has been
glorified, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. 

People: Amen.

SECOND EXORCISM

Deacon:* *Let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy.

Priest:  
It is God, the Holy One, who is beyond understanding and unsearchable in
all his works and in his strength, the One who foreordained for you, O
Devil, the penalty of eternal damnation, that through us, his
unprofitable servants, orders you, and every power that works with you,
to depart from the one who has been newly sealed in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, our true God. I adjure you, most evil, unclean, foul,
abominable and alien spirit, by the power of Jesus Christ, who has all
authority in heaven and on earth and who said to the deaf and dumb
demon, ‘Come out of the man, and enter him no more\!’ Depart\!
Acknowledge the futility of your power, which had no authority even over
swine. Remember the One who ordered you, in accordance with your own
request, to enter the herd of swine. Fear God, at whose command the
earth was established upon the waters, who created the heavens and fixed
the mountains with a king post and the valleys with a cross-beam, placed
sand as a boundary for the sea and made a safe path through wild water;
who touches the mountains and they smoke; who wraps himself in light as
in a garment, stretching out the heavens like a tent cloth; who roofs
his upper chambers with waters; who established the earth on its
foundations; it will not be moved for to age on age; who summoned the
water of the sea and poured it out upon the face of the earth. Come and
depart from one who is being made ready for holy Enlightenment. I adjure
you by the saving Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his precious Body
and Blood and his dread Coming; for he will come, and he will not delay,
to judge the whole earth and he will condemn you and the power that
works with you to the Gehenna of fire, handing you over to the exterior
darkness, where the worm is unsleeping and the fire is not quenched.
Because the might is Christ our God’s, with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.

THIRD EXORCISM

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.

People:* *Lord, have mercy.

Priest:  
Lord Sabaoth, God of Israel, who heal every disease and every sickness,
look upon your servant, search out, seek and drive from him/her all the
activities of the devil. Rebuke the unclean spirits and expel them, and
cleanse the work of your hands; and using your swift force, crush Satan
speedily under his/her feet and grant him/her victories against him and
all his unclean spirits, so that, obtaining mercy from you, he/she may
be found worthy of your immortal and heavenly Mysteries and may give
glory to you, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. 

People:* *Amen.

Deacon:* *Let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy.

Priest:  
Master and Lord, the One who Is, who made man according to your image
and likeness and gave him the power of eternal life; then, when he fell
through sin, did not disdain him, but provided for the salvation of the
world through the incarnation of your Christ, do you yourself receive
also this creature of yours, whom you have redeemed from the slavery of
the foe, into the heavenly Kingdom. Open the eyes of his/her mind so
that the enlightenment of your Gospel may dawn on him/her. Yoke to
his/her life an Angel of light, to deliver him/her from every attack of
the adversary, from evil encounter, from the noon-day demon, from evil
visions.

Then the Priest breathes on the mouth, forehead and breast of the
Catechumen, saying:

Drive out of him/her every evil and unclean spirit hiding and lurking in
his/her heart. (He says this three times) The spirit of error, the
spirit of wickedness, the spirit of idolatry and diabolic oppression;
the spirit of lying and every uncleanness which operates in accordance
with the teaching of the devil. And make him/her a rational sheep of the
flock of your Christ, an honoured member of your Church, a vessel made
holy, a child of light and an heir of your Kingdom. So that, having
lived in accordance with your commandments, preserving the seal
undamaged and keeping his/her garment undefiled, he/she may attain to
the blessedness of the Saints in your Kingdom.

Aloud:  
By the grace and pity and love for mankind of your Only-Begotten Son,
with whom you are blessed, together with your all-holy, good and
life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People:* *Amen.

When the Catechumen is undressed and unshod, the Priest turns him/her to
the West with hands raised on high, and says:

Do you renounce Satan? And all his works? And all his angels? And all
his worship? And all his solemn rites?

And to each question the Catechumen, or the Godparent, if the catechumen
is a barbarian or a child, answers and says:

I renounce them.

And when he/she has said this three times, the Priest again asks the one
to be baptized:

Have you renounced Satan?

And the Catechumen, or the Godparent, answers:

I have renounced him.

After he/she has said this three times the Priest says:

Then blow and spit on him.

After this the Priest turns the Catechumen to the East with lowered
hands and says to him/her three times:

Do you unite yourself to Christ?

The Catechumen, or Godparent, answers three times:

I unite myself to him.

And again the Priest asks three times:

Have you united yourself to Christ?

And each time the Catechumen, or Godparent, answers:

I have united myself to him.

And the Priest asks:

And do you believe in him?

The Catechumen, or Godparent, answers:

I believe in him as King and God, and continues:

I believe in one God, Father almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
from the Father before all ages. Light from Light, true God from true
God, begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father; through him all
things were made; for our sake and for our salvation he came down from
heaven, and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and
became man; he was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, and
suffered and was buried; he rose again on the third day, in accordance
with the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven and is seated at the right
hand of the Father; he is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead; and his kingdom will have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life, who proceeds from
the Father, who together with Father and Son is worshipped and together
glorified; who spoke through the Prophets. In one Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church; I confess one Baptism for the forgiveness of sins; I
await the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to come.
Amen.

When the holy Profession of faith has been completed \[the Priest again
asks three times: Have you united yourself to Christ? and the rest. The
Catechumen, or the Godparent, answers each time as before. After the
third question and the third recitation of the Creed\] the Priest asks
three times:

Have you united yourself to Christ?

And the Catechumen, or the Godparent, answers:

I have united myself to him.

And the Priest says:

Bow down also and worship him.

The candidate makes a prostration, saying:

I worship Father, Son and Holy Spirit, Trinity consubstantial and
undivided.

The Priest says:  
Blessed is God who wishes all to be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Then he says this Prayer:

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy.

Priest:

Master, Lord our God, call your servant N. to your holy Enlightenment
and count him/her worthy of the great grace of your holy Baptism. Put
off his/her old self and renew him/her for eternal life and fill him/her
with the power of your Holy Spirit for union with your Christ, that
he/she may no longer be a child of the body, but a child of your
kingdom. Through the good pleasure and grace of your Only-begotten Son,
with whom you are blessed, together with your all-holy, good and
life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. 

People: Amen.

#### SERVICE OF HOLY BAPTISM

The Priest enters the Sanctuary and vests in white vestments and the
cuffs. While all the candles are being lit he takes the censer, goes to
the Font and censes it in a circle. He hands the censer away and makes a
bow.

Then the Deacon says:  
Master, give the blessing.

The Priest, out loud:  
Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People:* *Amen.

Deacon: In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy. And so after each petition.

Deacon:* *For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls,
let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop (N.), for the honoured order of presbyters, for the
diaconate in Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to
the Lord.

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may be sanctified by the power, operation and descent of
the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may be sent down upon it the grace of redemption, the
blessing of Jordan, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may come down upon these waters the cleansing operation of
the Trinity beyond being, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be enlightened with the enlightenment of knowledge and true
religion through the descent of the Holy Spirit, let us pray to the
Lord.

That this water may shown to be a protection against every assault of
visible and invisible enemies, let us pray to the Lord.

That the one to be baptized in it may become worthy of the incorruptible
Kingdom, let us pray to the Lord.

For the one who now draws near for holy Enlightenment and for his/her
safety and salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That he/she may be shown to be a child of light and heir of eternal
blessings, let us pray to the Lord.

That he/she may be rooted in, and be a partaker in the death and
resurrection of Christ our God, let us pray to the Lord.

That he/she may preserve the garment of Baptism and the pledge of the
Holy Spirit unsullied and undefiled on the dread Day of Christ our God,
let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may become for him/her a washing of rebirth for
forgiveness of sins and a garment of incorruption, let us pray to the
Lord.

That the Lord God would hearken to the voice of our supplication, let us
pray to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

People:* *To you, O Lord.

While the Deacon is saying this the Priest says this prayer quietly:

Compassionate and merciful God, you test minds and hearts and alone know
the secrets of mortals, for no deed is hidden in your sight, but
everything is naked and exposed to your eyes. You know all about me; do
not then despise me or turn your face from me, but overlook my offences
at this hour, you who overlook the sins of mortals for their repentance.
Wash away the filth of my body and the defilement of my soul by the
power of your invisible and spiritual right hand, lest, as I proclaim
freedom to others and grant it by the perfect faith of your ineffable
love for mankind, I myself, as a slave of sin, become unworthy of it.
May I not, Master, alone good and lover of mankind, may I not be turned
away humiliated and put to shame, but from on high send power out to me
and give me strength for your great and heavenly Mystery which lies
before me, and through my miserable person form your Christ in the one
who is about to be reborn. Build him/her up on the foundation of your
Apostles and Prophets, and do not pull him/her down, but plant him/her
as a plant of truth in your holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, and do
not pull him/her out. So that by his/her progressing in true religion,
your all-holy name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, may be glorified
also through him/her, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

It is to be noted that the Priest says none of this out loud, but he
even says the Amen to himself. Then he says the following prayer in a
loud voice:

Great are you, O Lord, and wonderful are your works; and no word will be
adequate to sing the praise of your wonders (x3). For as by your will
you brought the universe from non-existence into being, by your might
you uphold creation and by your providence you direct the world. From
four elements you composed the world, with four seasons you crowned the
circle of the year. All the spiritual Powers tremble before you. The sun
sings your praise, the moon glorifies you, the stars entreat you, the
light obeys you, the deeps tremble before you, the springs are your
servants. You stretched out the heaven like a curtain; you established
the earth on the waters; you walled in the sea with sand; you poured out
the air for breathing. Angelic Powers minister to you, the choirs of
Archangels worship you, the many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged
Seraphim, as they stand and fly around you, veil themselves in fear of
your unapproachable glory. For you, God uncircumscribed, without
beginning and ineffable, came upon earth taking the form of a slave,
being found in the likeness of mortals. For through the compassion of
your mercy, Master, you could not endure to watch the human race being
tyrannized by the devil, but you came and saved us. We confess your
grace, we proclaim your mercy, we do not conceal your benevolence. You
set at liberty the generations of our nature, you sanctified a virgin
womb by your birth. All creation sang your praise when you appeared. For
you, our God, were seen on earth and lived among mortals. You also
sanctified the streams of Jordan by sending down to them from heaven
your all-holy Spirit, and you crushed the heads of the dragons that
lurked their. Therefore, O King, lover of mankind, be present now too,
through the visitation of your Holy Spirit, and sanctify this water
(x3). Give it the grace of redemption, the blessing of Jordan. Make it a
source of incorruption, a gift of sanctification, an deliverance from
sins, a destruction of demons. Make it unapproachable by hostile powers
and filled with angelic strength. Let those that conspire against your
creature flee from it, because I, Lord, have called upon your Name,
which is wondrous and glorious and fearful to adversaries.

And breathing on the water three times, with two fingers he makes the
sign of the Cross in it three times and prays over it, saying:

Let all adverse powers be crushed beneath the sign of the image of your
Cross (x3). We pray you, Lord, let all airy and invisible spectres
withdraw from us, and do not let a demon of darkness hide itself in this
water, and do not let an evil spirit, bringing darkening of thoughts and
disturbance of mind, go down into it with the one who is being baptized.
But do you, Master of all things, declare this water to be water of
redemption, water of sanctification, cleansing of flesh and spirit,
untying of bonds, forgiveness of offences, enlightenment of soul,
washing of rebirth, renewal of spirit, gift of adoption, garment of
incorruption, source of life. For it was you, Lord, who said, ‘Wash and
be made clean, and put away evils from your souls’. It is you who have
given us the grace of rebirth from on high through water and Spirit.
Manifest yourself, Lord, in this water, and grant that the one being
baptized in it may be transformed for the putting off of the old self
that is corrupted after the desires of deception, and may put on the new
that is renewed after the image of the One who created him/her. So that,
planted in the likeness of your death through Baptism, he/she may also
become a partaker in your Resurrection, and having guarded the gift of
the Holy Spirit and increased the deposit of grace, may receive the
prize of his/her high calling and be numbered with the firstborn, whose
names are inscribed in heaven, in you our God and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Because to you belong glory, might, honour and worship, together with
your Father who is without beginning and your all-holy, good, and
life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.

Priest: Peace to all.

People: And to your spirit.

Deacon: Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

People:* *To you, O Lord.

The Priest breathes on the container of oil three times and signs the
oil three times as it held by the Deacon \[Godparent\].

Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy.

The Priest says the following prayer quietly:

Master, Lord God of our fathers, who sent out a dove to those in Noë’s
ark, with a branch of olive in its beak as sign of reconciliation and
salvation from the flood, and through these things prefigured the
Mystery of grace; who have given the fruit of the olive for the
completion of your holy Mysteries; who through it both filled those
under the Law with the Holy Spirit, and make perfect those under grace;
do you yourself bless this olive oil also by the power, operation and
descent of your Holy Spirit, so that it may become an anointing of
incorruption, a weapon of righteousness, renewal of soul and body, a
driving away of every operation of the devil, for the removal of all
evils from those who are anointed with it in faith, or who partake of it
to your glory and that of your Only-Begotten Son and your all-holy,
good, and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.

Deacon: Let us attend.

The Priest, chanting Alleluia three times with the People, makes three
Crosses with the oil in the water. Then he proclaims:**

Blessed is God, who enlightens and sanctifies everyone who comes into
the world, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.

The one to be baptized is brought forward. The Priest takes some of the
oil and makes the sign of the Cross on the forehead, breast and back of
the candidate, saying:

The servant of God, N., is anointed with the oil of gladness, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

As he signs their breast and back he says:

For healing of soul and body.

On the ears:

For the hearing of faith.

On the feet:

For your feet to walk.

On the hands:

Your hands made me and fashioned me.

And when the whole body has been anointed the Priest baptizes the
person, holding them upright and facing East, as he says:

The servant of God N. is baptized, in the name of the Father. Amen. And
of the Son. Amen. And of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

At each invocation the Priest immerses them and raises them again. After
the baptism the Priest washes, as he and the People chant (x3):

**Psalm 31**  
Blessed are those whose iniquities have been forgiven and whose sins
have been covered (x3). Blessed is the one to whom the Lord imputes no
sin and in whose mouth there is no guile. Because I kept silent my bones
grew old from my crying out all day long. Because night and day your
hand was heavy upon me; I was turned to wretchedness by a thorn’s being
fastened in me. I acknowledged my sin and did not hide my iniquity. I
said, ‘Against myself I will admit my iniquity to the Lord’, and you
forgave the ungodliness of my heart. For this every holy one will pray
to you at a fitting moment. Except in a flood of many waters they will
not come near him. For you are my refuge from the affliction which
surrounds me, my joy to deliver me from those who have surrounded me. ‘I
will make you understand and guide you in the way in which you should
go. I will fix my eyes upon you. Do not become like horse and mule, who
have no understanding. With bit and bridle you must constrain their
cheeks so that they do not come near you.’ Many are the scourges of the
sinner, but mercy will surround the one who hopes in the Lord. Rejoice
in the Lord and be glad you righteous, and boast all you upright in
heart.

And as he clothes the newly baptized, the Priest says:

The servant of God N. is clothed with a tunic of righteousness, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Then the following is chanted in Tone 8:  
Grant me a tunic of light, O most merciful, Christ our God, who wrap
yourself in light as in a garment.

After the newly-baptized is clothed:  
Deacon: Let us pray to the Lord.

People: Lord, have mercy.

And the Priest says this prayer:

Blessed are you, Lord God Almighty, the source of blessings, the Sun of
righteousness, who have made the light of salvation shine for those in
darkness through the appearing of your Only-Begotten Son and our God,
and have granted us, unworthy though are, the grace of blessed cleansing
by holy Baptism, and divine sanctification by life-giving Anointing. And
you have now been well-pleased to make your newly-enlightened servant to
be born again through water and Spirit, and have granted him/her
forgiveness of sins both voluntary and involuntary. Do you then, Master,
compassionate, universal King, grant him/her also the Seal of the gift
of your holy, all-powerful and adorable Spirit and the Communion of the
holy Body and precious Blood of your Christ. Keep him/her in your
sanctification; confirm him/her in the Orthodox Faith; deliver him/her
from the evil one and all his devices, and by your saving fear guard
his/her soul in purity and righteousness; so that being in every deed
and word well-pleasing to you, he/she may become a child and heir of
your heavenly Kingdom.

Aloud:  
Because you are our God, a God who has mercy and who saves, and to you
we give glory, to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

People: Amen.

And after the Prayer he anoints the newly baptized with the holy Myron,
making a sign of the Cross on the forehead, the eyes, the nostrils, the
mouth, the two ears, the breast, the hands and the feet, and saying:

Seal of the gift of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

\[In many places it is the custom for the Priest to place the baptismal
Cross, after blessing it in the Baptismal Water, round the neck of the
newly baptized and to give them a lighted candle. See Appendix.\]

Then the Priest, having washed his hands, censes the Font, going round
it in a circle, with the Godparent and the Newly-baptized following and
standing opposite him, while we chant:

As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
Alleluia.

As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
Alleluia.

As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
Alleluia.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Have put on Christ. Alleluia.

As many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
Alleluia.

\[Deacon: ** Let us attend.

Priest: Peace to all.

Reader: And to your spirit.

Deacon:* *Wisdom.\]

Reader: Prokeimenon in the 3rd Tone. \[Psalm 26\]

The Lord is my enlightenment and my Saviour; \* whom shall I fear?

Verse: The Lord is the defender of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

Deacon: Wisdom.

The Apostle.

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Romans.  
\[6:3-11\]

Deacon: Let us attend.

Reader:  
Brethren, as many of us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into
his death. We were buried then with him through baptism to death, so
that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the
Father, we too might walk in newness of life. For if we have grown into
union with him through a death like his, we shall also be united with
him in the resurrection. For we know that our old self was crucified
with him, so that our sinful body might be done away with, that we might
no longer be in slavery to sin. For one who has died has been justified
from sin. If then we died with Christ, we believe that we shall also
live with him. For we know that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies
no more; death no longer lords it over him. As to dying, he died once
and for all; as to living, he lives for God. Consequently, you also must
consider yourselves dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Priest:* *Peace to you.

Reader:* *And to your spirit. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

The Gospel

Deacon: Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the Holy Gospel.

Priest:* *Peace to all.

People: And to your spirit.

Priest:

The Reading is from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.  
\[

