\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ [Paralysed Man](ParalCan.md) \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ Blind Man \]
\[ [Akathist](akathist.md) \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

**CANON FOR THE MAN BORN BLIND**  
BY  
**SAINT JOSEPH OF THESSALONIKI**

INTRODUCTION

The canon for the feast of the Man Born Blind is by St Joseph of
Thessaloniki \[Feast day 14 July\], the brother of St Theodore the
Studite. He is also the author of the canons for the two preceding
Sundays, that for the eve of the Assumption, commonly called the
Ascension, and the second canon for the feast itself. He usually signs
his compositions with his name **JOSEPH** as an acrostic in the ninth
ode. This is preserved in the following translation.

Like all the canons for the Sundays of Pascha, this canon seems
originally to have been intended to stand alone, since only one
troparion deals with the subject of the feast, the others forming, in
effect, a standard Resurrection canon.

The subject first troparion of all the odes is the Crucifixion and of
the fourth the Blind Man, and every ode ends with a Triadikon and a
Theotokion. The first two odes have a similar pattern, which is found
elsewhere in the liturgical texts. The subject of the first troparion is
the Cross, of the second the ‘noble Joseph’ , of the third the
Myrrhbearers and the fourth the Blind Man. Some of the later odes, with
their allusions to Acts 1 and Luke 24, look forward to the coming feast
of the Assumption.

I have not included detailed references to holy Scripture, though there
are many in the text. The phrase ‘right Spirit’ in the Triadikon of the
9th ode is a quotation from Psalm 50, but because it sounds somewhat
strange in English I have placed it in inverted commas.

-----

# THE CANON

**The Acrostic in the 9th Ode  
**J O S E P H

****

A Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki

Ode 1. Tone 5. The Irmos.

Israel passed dry-shod, O Lord, over earth on which the sun had never
shone, had never seen; deep which the vault of heaven had never seen
naked; and you led him to the mountain of your sanctification as he sang
and chanted a song of victory.

****

Troparia.

By willingly accepting crucifixion in the flesh, you have become a
source of blessing and life for the world, O Master, only all-blessed
and Creator of all; therefore we bless you, we hymn and glorify you, as
we sing and chant a song of victory.

When you were dead, O long-suffering, the noble Joseph laid you in the
lowest pit and rolled a stone to the door of the grave; but you rose in
glory, raising the world with you, as it sang and chanted a song of
victory.

The Angel appeared and said to the holy women: Why do you bring spices
with tears? Christ has risen\! Run, tell the Disciples who have seen
God, as they mourn and weep, so that they may leap and dance for joy.

Extraordinary wonders the Redeemer performs; he even cured a man blind
from birth, anointing him with clay and saying: Go, wash in Siloam, that
you may know that I am God who walk the earth bearing flesh because of
my compassionate pity.

****

Triadikon.

Honouring one Essence in three Persons, let us the faithful glorify the
Father and the Son and the right Spirit, maker and Lord, and redeemer of
all, one uncreated God, as we cry with the Bodiless hosts: Holy, Holy,
Holy are you, O King\!

****

Theotokion.

Because of his compassionate pity the Lord dwelt in your womb that had
not known wedlock, O Pure one, for he wished to save mankind which had
perished through the wiles of the foe: implore him then that this city
may be saved from every capture and invasion by foes.

****

Ode 3. The Irmos.

O Lord, make firm my heart, shaken by the waves of life, as God guiding
it to a fair haven.

****

Troparia.

Long-suffering Lord, you made firm the hearts of those who are shaken
when you shook the earth, by your hallowed Crucifixion, which you
underwent in the flesh.

The noble Joseph laid you in a new tomb, O merciful; but you arose from
the dead on the third day, renewing us all.

Why do you seek the Lord as a corpse? He has risen as he said, cried the
Angel to the women, dazzling with his godlike form.

You once cured a man blind from birth who came to you, All-merciful,
glorifying your dispensation and your wonders.

****

Triadikon.

We worship God, Father without beginning, Son and divine Spirit, triple
uncreated, three-personned nature, one God of all.

****

Theotokion.

You gave birth from a virgin womb to God incarnate; implore him,
all-holy Lady, to have pity on us.

****

Ode 4. The Irmos.

I heard your report, Lord, and I was afraid; I considered your
dispensation and I glorified you, only lover of mankind.

****

Troparia.

By being placed on a Tree you, who are life, brought me, who had died
through a tree, back to life through your great mercy. Therefore, O
Word, I glorify you.

Marvellously assembled together with your Initiates, O Lord, you said to
them: Go forth, proclaim my Resurrection everywhere.

Confirming your Rising from the grave, Lord, for many days you assembled
together with your friends, and made them joyful.

You gave sight to a man Blind from the womb, Lord, when you said: Go,
wash and receive your sight, and glorify my Godhead.

****

Triadikon.

O Trinity, identical in honour, undivided in Essence, divided in
Persons, save all who with fear faithfully glorify you.

****

Theotokion.

We glorify your child-bearing above nature, O Immaculate, in faith
blessing you, O all unblemished, as the one who gave birth to the God of
all.

****

Ode 5. The Irmos.

Have pity on my wretched soul as it fights a night battle with the
darkness of the passions, and make your rays clear as day shine in me, O
spiritual Sun, to turn my night into light.

****

Troparia.

You were lifted up on a Tree, and lifting up all mortals with yourself,
O merciful, you put to death the hostile serpent and, as only God of
all, gave life to what your hands had fashioned.

Willingly you became a corpse and were laid in a tomb, immortal King,
and you emptied all the palaces of Hell, raising the dead by your
Resurrection.

When you had accomplished great marvels upon earth, O Word, a lawless
people slew you; but, being alone powerful, Lord Christ, you rose, as
you had foretold, from the dead.

Having opened the eyes of one who had not seen the natural light, you
enlightened the pupils of his soul and led him to give glory when he
recognised you as maker, through compassion seen as a mortal.

****

Triadikon.

Let all us faithful glorify a Trinity in unity and a Unity in trinity,
Father, Son and right Spirit, one God, truly creator of all.

****

Theotokion.

How did you bear a child without knowing man, O Virgin-mother, full of
God’s grace? How nourish creation’s nourisher? As he alone understands,
who is maker of all and God.

****

Ode 6. The Irmos.

As you delivered the Prophet from the beast, O Lord, bring me too, I
pray, from the deep of ungovernable passions; that I may look again
towards your holy temple.

****

Troparia.

Crucified with thieves, O Master, from evil thieves and soul-destroying
passions, you delivered us who praise in harmony your Crucifixion and
your Rising, O Lord who loves mankind.

A lifeless corpse they laid you in a tomb, O Christ, who breathe life
into all the dead; but you arose, Lord, emptying all the graves, O Word,
by your sovereign power.

After your Rising, O Christ, you said to your friends: Tarry in
Jerusalem, until you are clothed with invincible strength and sure
support from on high.

You made clay, and anointed the eyes of the man Blind from birth, and
you gave him the grace of sight as he hymned your immaculate power,
through which you saved the world.

****

Triadikon.

Three-personned Unity, Father unbegotten, Son begotten, Spirit
proceeding, thrice-holy Lord, one Essence, one Power, save your whole
people.

****

Theotokion.

Who can recount your great things, O Pure one? For beyond nature you
bore God in the flesh, who delivers the world from every sin through
you, Virgin all-unblemished.

****

Ode 7. The Irmos.

Quencher of fire was the prayer of the young men; the furnace, herald of
the marvel, refreshed and did not scorch, did not burn up those who
hymned the God of our fathers.

****

Troparia.

When you were hung upon the Tree, O Saviour, the sun was quenched, the
earth heaved, all creation was shaken, and the dead were raised from the
graves.

When you rose from the dead, O King, the souls which slept there were
raised with you and glorified your sovereign power, through which the
bonds of death were loosed.

At dawn a choir of women came to anoint you, but learning that you had
risen, Lord, they rejoiced with the sacred Disciples; through whom grant
us redemption from evils.

You anointed with clay the eyes of the man born Blind and you ordered
him to go to Siloam: having washed he gained his sight as he hymned you,
O Christ, King of all.

****

Triadikon.

Let us hymn the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without
beginning and the all-holy Spirit: Holy, Holy, Holy, are you, O God,
King of all.

****

Theotokion.

After child-birth you were seen to be a virgin, O Pure one; for you gave
birth, O Immaculate, to God who made natures new by his power; ever
implore him that we may be saved.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

The King and creator of all, O assembly of Angels, congregation of
mankind, priests praise, levites bless, people highly exalt unto the
ages.

****

Troparia.

The ranks of Angels, seeing you hanging upon the Cross, O Christ,
universal King, and altering all creation, were struck with fear as they
hymned your love for mankind.

Hell, seeing you below, groaned aloud and rapidly gave back the dead
whom it had held under guard since time began, O Christ, as they hymned
your love for mankind.

Having accomplished extraordinary marvels, you were willingly lifted up
on a cross and joined with the dead, O Christ, and you put Hell to death
and with courage released all its prisoners.

You gave eyes to the Blind Man who came to you, O Christ, ordering him
to wash in the spring of Siloam, to see and to proclaim you as God,
manifest in the flesh for the salvation of the world.

****

Triadikon.

O undivided Trinity, unconfused Unity, God of all and creator of all
things, save from manifold temptations those who hymn and faithfully
worship your might.

****

Theotokion.

Immaculate Virgin, full of God’s grace, ever implore your Son not to put
me to shame on the day of judgement, but to number me with the chosen
sheep.

****

Ode 9. The Irmos.

For he that is mighty has done great things for you, showing you to be a
pure virgin after child-birth, for you bore without seed your own maker:
therefore, O Mother of God, we magnify you.

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif)oined to the gallows of the
Cross, Christ Saviour, you triumphed over all the hostile forces of the
foe, and abolished the former curse; therefore as is right we magnify
you.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif)n seeing you below with your
soul, O Word, Hell groaned aloud and in fear released all the dead, who
recognised the might of your authority; with whom as is right we magnify
you.

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif)eeing him accomplishing
signs and dread wonders the people of the Hebrews in jealousy slew him
who plundered Hell by his Resurrection, and as powerful raised all with
him.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)ven as you said, you rose
from the dead, O Giver of Life, and appeared to the holy Disciples after
your Rising, you who did signs and gave sight to the blind; with them to
the ages we magnify you.

****

Triadikon.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)raise I give to Light, the
Father, glory to Light, the Son, a hymn to Light, the ‘right Spirit’:
one undivided Light, recognised in three Persons, God, King of all
creation.

****

Theotokion.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)oly Virgin, you appear wider
then the heavens for you contained and bore in a body God, the
uncircumscribed, for the redemption of all those who sing your praise
with undoubting faith.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

