\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](blindsunday.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](BlindVesp.md) \] \[ Matins \]

## 

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st Psalter reading, Resurrection Kathismata. Tone 5.

Let us celebrate the Cross of the Lord, let us honour with hymns his
holy Burial, and highly glorify his Resurrection; for as God with
himself he raised the dead from the graves, having plundered the might
of death and the strength of the Devil, and made light dawn for those in
Hades.

****

Verse:

Arise, O Lord my God, lift up your hand; forget not your poor for ever.

O Lord, you were called dead, who put death to death; you were placed in
a grave, who emptied the graves: above, soldiers were guarding the tomb,
below, you raised the dead from every age. Lord, all-powerful and beyond
understanding, glory to you\!

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Hail holy mountain on which God has walked: hail living bush and
unconsumed by fire; hail the world’s only bridge to God, which leads
mortals over to eternal life; hail Maiden undefiled who bore without
wedlock the salvation of our souls.

****

After the 2nd Psalter reading, Kathismata. Tone 5.

Merciful Lord, transgressors nailed you between malefactors and pierced
your side with a lance; but you accepted burial, you overthrew the gates
of Hades, and rose on the third day; the women ran to see you and they
announced the Resurrection to the Apostles. O Saviour highly-exalted,
whom Angels praise, O blessed Lord, glory to you.

****

Verse:

I will confess you, Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of all your
marvellous works.

Your strange mystery, O my Saviour, has become the salvation of the
world; for as befitted God you rose from the tomb and as God raised with
you those who had perished: O life of all, Lord, glory to you.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O Bride who knew not wedlock, Mother of God, who turned Eve’s grief to
joy, we the faithful praise and worship you; for you have brought us
back from the ancient curse; and now, all-praised, all-holy one,
intercede unceasingly that we may be saved.

****

After Psalm 118, the Evlogitaria. Then the Ypakoï. Tone 5.

Amazed in mind by the vision of the Angel and enlightened in soul by the
divine Rising, the Myrrhbearers gave the good news to the Apostles:
‘Announce among the nations the Lord’s Resurrection, who works with
you by wonders and grants us his great mercy’

****

The Anavathmi of the Tone. Antiphon 1.

In my distress, like David, I sing to you, my Saviour: Deliver me from a
treacherous tongue.

For dwellers in the desert life is blessed, for their wings are the love
of God.

Glory. Both now.

By the Holy Spirit all things are held fast, the visible with the
invisible; for his might is his own as truly one of the Trinity.

****

Antiphon 2.

Let us be lifted, O soul, to the mountains; come thither where help
comes from.

Let your right hand take wing, O Lord, and guard me from every mischief.

Glory. Both now.

To the Holy Spirit let us say, as we confess him to be God: You are God,
life, love, light, mind; you are goodness, you are king for ever.

****

Antiphon 3.

For those who said to me: ‘Let us go to the courts of the Lord’, full of
great joy, I offer prayers.

Dread things shall be brought to fulfilment upon the house of David: for
fire shall be there burning every shameful thought.

Glory. Both now.

To the Holy Spirit belongs the dignity of being the source of life, for
from him every living thing is animated, as by the Father and the Word.

****

Prokeimenon.

Arise, O Lord my God: for you reign for ever.

Verse: I will confess you, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of
all your wonders.

The 8th Resurrection Gospel, then Having seen the Resurrection of
Christ, Psalm 50 etc.

****

The Canons, of Easter with that of the Mother of God to 8, and of the
Blind Man to 6.

Easter Canon. Tone 1. Ode 1.  
Irmos.

The day of Resurrection, let us be radiant, O peoples: Pascha, the
Lord’s Pascha; for Christ God has brought us from death to life, and
from earth to heaven, as we sing the triumphal song.

****

Troparia.

Let us purify our senses, and we shall see Christ shining forth, in the
unapproachable light of the Resurrection, and we shall clearly hear him
saying ‘Rejoice\!’, as we sing the triumphal song.

Let the heavens as is fitting rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let
the whole world, both seen and unseen, keep the feast: for Christ has
risen, our eternal joy.

****

Canon of the Mother of God. Tone 1.  
The Acrostic in the first Troparia:  

THEOPHAN.

**Ode 1. The same Irmos.**

![dropcap-t.gif (995 bytes)](dropcap-t.gif)he boundary of death you
forced open, all-pure Virgin, by bearing Christ the eternal Life, who
shone out to-day from the tomb, and enlightened the world.

Having seen your Son and God risen from the dead, you rejoice with the
Apostles, O holy and full of grace, and as cause of the joy of all, O
all-pure Mother of God, you first received the greeting ‘Rejoice’.

****

Canon of the Blind Man. Tone 5. With an Acrostic in the 9th Ode:

  
JOSEPH  
**Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki.** ****

Ode 1. Tone 5. The Irmos.

\[Israel passed dry-shod, O Lord, over earth on which the sun had never
shone, had never seen; deep which the vault of heaven had never seen
naked; and you led him to the mountain of your sanctification as he sang
and chanted a song of victory.\]

****

Troparia.

By willingly accepting crucifixion in the flesh, you have become a
source of blessing and life for the world, O Master, only all-blessed
and Creator of all; therefore we bless you, we hymn and glorify you, as
we sing and chant a song of victory.

When you were dead, O long-suffering, the noble Joseph laid you in the
lowest pit and rolled a stone to the door of the grave; but you rose in
glory, raising the world with you, as it sang and chanted a song of
victory.

The Angel appeared and said to the holy women: Why do you bring spices
with tears? Christ has risen\! Run, tell the Disciples who have seen
God, as they mourn and weep, so that they may leap and dance for joy.

Extraordinary wonders the Redeemer performs; he even cured a man blind
from birth, anointing him with clay and saying: Go, wash in Siloam, that
you may know that I am God who walk the earth bearing flesh because of
my compassionate pity.

****

Triadikon.

Honouring one Essence in three Persons, let us the faithful glorify the
Father and the Son and the right Spirit, maker and Lord, and redeemer of
all, one uncreated God, as we cry with the Bodiless hosts: Holy, Holy,
Holy are you, O King\!

****

Theotokion.

Because of his compassionate pity the Lord dwelt in your womb that had
not known wedlock, O Pure one, for he wished to save mankind which had
perished through the wiles of the foe: implore him then that this city
may be saved from every capture and invasion by foes.

****

Katavasia

To God the saviour let us sing, to him alone, who led his people through
the sea with unmoistened foot and drowned Pharaoh with all his army in
the deep, for he has been glorified.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

’Come let us drink a new drink, not one marvellously brought forth from
a barren rock, but the Source of incorruption, which springs up from the
tomb of Christ, in whom we are established’.

****

Troparia.

Now all things are filled with light, both heaven and earth and those
beneath the earth: so let all creation sing Christ’s rising, by which it
is established.

Yesterday I was buried with you, O Christ, to-day I rise with you as you
arise: yesterday I was crucified with you, glorify me with you, Saviour,
in your Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)oly one, to-day I return to
life undefiled through the goodness of him who was born from you and
whose brightness blazes to all the ends of the earth.

Seeing God, whom you conceived in the flesh, rising from the dead as he
said, O holy one, dance; and magnify him as God, O Most Pure.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[O Lord, make firm my heart shaken by the waves of life, as God guiding
it to a fair haven.\]

****

Troparia.

Long-suffering Lord, you made firm the hearts of those who are shaken
when you shook the earth, by your hallowed Crucifixion, which you
underwent in the flesh.

The noble Joseph laid you in a new tomb, O merciful; but you arose from
the dead on the third day, renewing us all.

Why do you seek the Lord as a corpse? He has risen as he said, cried the
Angel to the women, dazzling with his godlike form.

You once cured a man blind from birth who came to you, All-merciful,
glorifying your dispensation and your wonders.

****

Triadikon.

We worship God, Father without beginning, Son and divine Spirit, triple
uncreated, three-personned nature, one God of all.

****

Theotokion.

You gave birth from a virgin womb to God incarnate; implore him,
all-holy Lady, to have pity on us.

****

Katavasia.

By the power of your Cross, O Christ, make firm my mind to hymn and
glorify your saving Assumption.

****

Kontakion of Easter. Tone 8. Model melody. \[By St Romanos\]

Though you descended into the tomb, O Immortal, yet you destroyed the
power of Hell; and you arose as victor, O Christ God, calling to the
Myrrh-bearing women: Rejoice\! and giving peace to your Apostles, O you
who grant resurrection to the fallen.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8.

The Master and maker of all things, as he passed along found a Blind Man
sitting by the way, lamenting and saying: ‘Never in my life have I seen
the sun shining or the moon shedding its light; therefore I cry out to
you, born of a Virgin to enlighten the universe: Enlighten me, as you
are compassionate, that falling down I may cry to you: Master Christ
God, grant me forgiveness of my offences through the multitude of your
mercy, only lover of mankind’. (**Twice).**

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

Let the Prophet Avvakum, inspired by God, keep the divine watch with us,
and show forth the radiant Angel, who with resounding voice declares:
To-day brings salvation to the world, for Christ has risen as
omnipotent.

****

Troparia.

Christ appeared as a male who opened a virgin womb: but as our food he
is called ‘lamb’: ‘unblemished’, as our Passover without stain: and
‘perfect’ for he is true God.

As a yearling lamb, for us the blessed crown, Christ was willingly
sacrificed for all, a cleansing Passover: and from the tomb the fair sun
of justice has shone for us again.

God’s forebear David dancing leaped before the Ark, mere shadow: but
seeing the fulfilment of the types, let us, God’s holy people, inspired,
rejoice, for Christ has risen as omnipotent.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)ven he who fashioned Adam
your forefather, O holy one, is fashioned from you, and by his own death
he has destroyed Adam’s death today, and shed light on all with the
divine beams of his Resurrection.

Seeing Christ, whom you bore, shining in beauty from the dead, O Pure
one, fair and lovely and spotless among women, as you rejoice to-day
with the Apostles at the salvation of all, glorify him.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[I heard your report, Lord, and I was afraid; I considered your
dispensation and I glorified you, only lover of mankind.\]

****

Troparia.

By being placed on a Tree you, who are life, brought me, who had died
through a tree, back to life through your great mercy. Therefore, O
Word, I glorify you.

Marvellously assembled together with your Initiates, O Lord, you said to
them: Go forth, proclaim my Resurrection everywhere.

Confirming your Rising from the grave, Lord, for many days you assembled
together with your friends, and made them joyful.

You gave sight to a man Blind from the womb, Lord, when you said: Go,
wash and receive your sight, and glorify my Godhead.

****

Triadikon.

O Trinity, identical in honour, undivided in Essence, divided in
Persons, save all who with fear faithfully glorify you.

****

Theotokion.

We glorify your child-bearing above nature, O Immaculate, in faith
blessing you, O all unblemished, as the one who gave birth to the God of
all.

****

Katavasia.

O Lord I heard the report of the sovereign power of your Cross: that
through it Paradise was opened: and I cried, Glory to your power, O
Lord.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

Let us arise in the early dawn, and instead of myrrh, offer praises to
the Master; and we shall see Christ, the Sun of Justice, who causes life
to dawn for all.

****

Troparia.

Those who were held by Hades’ bonds, seeing your measureless compassion,
press forward to the light, O Christ, with joyful step, praising an
eternal Passover.

With torches in our hands let us go forth to meet Christ as he comes
from the grave, like a bridegroom, and with the festive ranks of Angels,
let us feast God’s saving Passover.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif)pure Mother of God, the
assembly of the devout is enlightened by the divine, lifegiving rays of
the Resurrection of your Son, and is filled with joy.

You did not open the gates of the Virgin, when you took flesh; you did
not break the seals of the grave, O King of creation. Therefore when she
saw you risen, she rejoiced.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[Have pity on my wretched soul as it fights a night battle with the
darkness of the passions, and make your rays clear as day shine in me, O
spiritual Sun, to turn my night into light.\]

****

Troparia.

You were lifted up on a Tree, and lifting up all mortals with yourself,
O merciful, you put to death the hostile serpent and, as only God of
all, gave life to what your hands had fashioned.

Willingly you became a corpse and were laid in a tomb, immortal King,
and you emptied all the palaces of Hell, raising the dead by your
Resurrection.

When you had accomplished great marvels upon earth, O Word, a lawless
people slew you; but, being alone powerful, Lord Christ, you rose, as
you had foretold, from the dead.

Having opened the eyes of one who had not seen the natural light, you
enlightened the pupils of his soul and led him to give glory when he
recognised you as maker, through compassion seen as a mortal.

****

Triadikon.

Let all us faithful glorify a Trinity in unity and a Unity in trinity,
Father, Son and right Spirit, one God, truly creator of all.

****

Theotokion.

How did you bear a child without knowing man, O Virgin-mother, full of
God’s grace? How nourish creation’s nourisher? As he alone understands,
who is maker of all and God.

****

Katavasia.

Rising in the early dawn we cry to you, O Lord: Save us, for you are our
God, and we know no other but you.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

You went down to the deepest parts of the earth, and you shattered the
everlasting bars that held fast those that were fettered, O Christ. And
on the third day like Jonas from the whale, you arose from the tomb.

****

Troparia.

Keeping the seals intact O Christ, you rose from the tomb, you who did
not harm the locks of the Virgin’s womb at your birth, and you have
opened to us the gates of Paradise.

O my Saviour, the living, unslain Victim, as God offering yourself
willingly to the Father, you raised up with yourself all Adam’s race, in
rising from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)risoner of old of death and
corruption, the human race has been brought back through him was took
flesh from your spotless womb to incorruptible and everlasting life, O
Virgin Mother of God.

He who went down, O Holy one, into your womb, dwelt there and took flesh
beyond understanding, went down into the lowest parts of the earth and
raised Adam with himself when he rose from the tomb.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[As you delivered the Prophet from the beast, O Lord, bring me too, I
pray, from the deep of ungovernable passions; that I may look again
towards your holy temple.\]

****

Troparia.

Crucified with thieves, O Master, from evil thieves and soul-destroying
passions, you delivered us who praise in harmony your Crucifixion and
your Rising, O Lord who loves mankind.

A lifeless corpse they laid you in a tomb, O Christ, who breathe life
into all the dead; but you arose, Lord, emptying all the graves, O Word,
by your sovereign power.

After your Rising, O Christ, you said to your friends: Tarry in
Jerusalem, until you are clothed with invincible strength and sure
support from on high.

You made clay, and anointed the eyes of the man Blind from birth, and
you gave him the grace of sight as he hymned your immaculate power,
through which you saved the world.

****

Triadikon.

Three-personned Unity, Father unbegotten, Son begotten, Spirit
proceeding, thrice-holy Lord, one Essence, one Power, save your whole
people.

****

Theotokion.

Who can recount your great things, O Pure one? For beyond nature you
bore God in the flesh, who delivers the world from every sin through
you, Virgin all-unblemished.

****

Katavasia.

The deep surrounded me, the sea beast became a grave to me. But, O Lover
of mankind, I called out to you, O Lord, and your right hand saved me.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4

With the eyes of my soul mutilated I come to you, O Christ, as the man
blind from birth, crying to you in repentance: You are the radiant light
of those in darkness.

****

The Ikos.

Grant me a stream of inexpressible wisdom, and knowledge from above, O
Christ, light of those in darkness and guide of those who stray; that I
may recount what the divine book of the Gospel of peace teaches: the
miracle of the blind man; for being blind from birth he receives both
physical eyes and eyes of the soul, as he cries: You are the radiant
light of those in darkness.

****

Synaxarion of the Menaion, then the following.

The same day, the sixth Sunday from Pascha, we celebrate the wonder done
to the man blind from birth by our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus
Christ.

****

Verses.

Giver of light, Lyght out of Lyght, one blind  
From birth, O Word, you furnish now with eyes.

In your boundless mercy, giver of light, Christ our God, have mercy and
save us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

He who delivered the Children from the furnace, becoming man suffers as
a mortal, and through suffering he clothes the mortal with the glory of
incorruption: the only blessed and most glorious God of our fathers.

****

Troparia.

The holy women hastened after you with sweet spices. Whom they sought
with tears as a mortal, they worshipped with joy as the living God, and
they proclaimed the mystic Passover, O Christ, to your disciples.

We feast death’s slaughter, the overthrow of Hell, the first fruits of a
new eternal life: and dancing we hymn the cause: the only blessed and
most glorious God of our fathers.

How truly holy and all-festive is this saving night, how full of light,
herald of the bright day of the resurrection, in which the timeless
Light shone bodily for all from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)aving slain death, your Son,
O all-pure one, has to-day given to all life that endures to ages of
ages: the only blessed and highly exalted God of our fathers.

He who reigns over all creation becoming man dwelt in your womb, O full
of God’s grace, and having endured the Cross and death he has risen as
God and raised us with himself, for he is all powerful.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[Quencher of fire was the prayer of the young men; the furnace, herald
of the marvel, refreshed and did not scorch, did not burn up those who
hymned the God of our fathers.\]

****

Troparia.

When you were hung upon the Tree, O Saviour, the sun was quenched, the
earth heaved, all creation was shaken, and the dead were raised from the
graves.

When you rose from the dead, O King, the souls which slept there were
raised with you and glorified your sovereign power, through which the
bonds of death were loosed.

At dawn a choir of women came to anoint you, but learning that you had
risen, Lord, they rejoiced with the sacred Disciples; through whom grant
us redemption from evils.

You anointed with clay the eyes of the man born Blind and you ordered
him to go to Siloam: having washed he gained his sight as he hymned you,
O Christ, King of all.

****

Triadikon.

Let us hymn the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without
beginning and the all-holy Spirit: Holy, Holy, Holy, are you, O God,
King of all.

****

Theotokion.

After child-birth you were seen to be a virgin, O Pure one; for you gave
birth, O Immaculate, to God who made natures new by his power; ever
implore him that we may be saved.

****

Katavasia.

You saved the young men in the fiery furnace: blessed are you the God of
our fathers.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

This chosen and holy day is the first of Sabbaths, the Queen and Lady,
the Feast of Feasts and the Festival of Festivals on which we bless
Christ to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

Come let us share in the new fruit of the vine, of joy divine, and in
the kingdom of Christ, on the glorious day of the Resurrection, hymning
him as God to all the ages.

Lift your eyes around you, O Zion, and see: for behold like beacons
shedding light divine your children have come to you, from West and
North, from the Sea and from the East, blessing Christ in you to all the
ages.

Almighty Father, Word and Spirit, nature united in three Persons, beyond
all being and beyond all Godhead, into you we have been baptised and we
bless to all the ages.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-a.gif (1062 bytes)](dropcap-a.gif)s the creator came into the
world through you, O Virgin Mother of God, he tore open the womb of Hell
and gave us mortals the Resurrection; therefore we bless him to the
ages.

Your Son, O Virgin, having overthrown the might of death, in his
resurrection, as a mighty God, has exalted us with himself and deified
us; therefore we praise him to the ages.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[The King and creator of all, O assembly of Angels, congregation of
mankind, priests praise, levites bless, people highly exalt to the
ages.\]

****

Troparia.

The ranks of Angels, seeing you hanging upon the Cross, O Christ,
universal King, and altering all creation, were struck with fear as they
hymned your love for mankind.

Hell, seeing you below, groaned aloud and rapidly gave back the dead
whom it had held under guard since time began, O Christ, as they hymned
your love for mankind.

Having accomplished extraordinary marvels, you were willingly lifted up
on a cross and joined with the dead, O Christ, and you put Hell to death
and with courage released all its prisoners.

You gave eyes to the Blind Man who came to you, O Christ, ordering him
to wash in the spring of Siloam, to see and to proclaim you as God,
manifest in the flesh for the salvation of the world.

****

Triadikon.

O undivided Trinity, unconfused Unity, God of all and creator of all
things, save from manifold temptations those who hymn and faithfully
worship your might.

****

Theotokion.

Immaculate Virgin, full of God’s grace, ever implore your Son not to put
me to shame on the day of judgement, but to number me with the chosen
sheep.

****

Katavasia.

Son of God, begotten of the Father before the ages, and in these last
times incarnate of a Virgin Mother: praise him, O priests, highly exalt
him, O people, throughout all the ages.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

**Megalynarion: Magnify, O my soul, him who suffered willingly, and was
buried, and arose from the grave on the third day.**

Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and you too rejoice, O pure Mother
of God, at the arising of him to whom you gave birth.

**Megalynarion:** Magnify, O my soul, Christ the Giver of life, who
arose from the grave on the third day.

Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and you too rejoice, O pure Mother
of God, at the arising of him to whom you gave birth.

**Megalynarion:** Christ is the new Passover, the living sacrificial
victim, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world.

O your divine and beloved and sweetest voice; you have truly promised
that you will be with us unto the end of the world, O Christ; and we
faithful rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

**Megalynarion:** To-day the whole creation is glad and rejoices, for
Christ has risen and Hell has been despoiled.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ; O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God\! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the unwaning day of your
Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-n.gif (1140 bytes)](dropcap-n.gif)ow in harmony, O Virgin, we
faithful call you blessed: Hail gate of the Lord: Hail living city: Hail
through whom to-day the light of the Resurrection from the dead of him
who was born from you has shone for us.

Rejoice, be glad, divine gate of the light; for Jesus, who set in the
tomb, has dawned shining more brightly than the sun, and shedding his
rays on all the faithful, O Sovereign Lady full of God’s grace.

****

Of the Blind Man. The Irmos.

\[For he that is mighty has done great things for you, showing you to be
a pure virgin after child-birth, for you bore without seed your own
maker: therefore, O Mother of God, we magnify you.\]

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif)oined to the gallows of the
Cross, Christ Saviour, you triumphed over all the hostile forces of the
foe, and abolished the former curse; therefore as is right we magnify
you.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif)n seeing you below with your
soul, O Word, Hell groaned aloud and in fear released all the dead, who
recognised the might of your authority; with whom as is right we magnify
you.

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif)eeing him accomplishing
signs and dread wonders the people of the Hebrews in jealousy slew him
who plundered Hell by his Resurrection, and as powerful raised all with
him.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)ven as you said, you rose
from the dead, O Giver of Life, and appeared to the holy Disciples after
your Rising, you who did signs and gave sight to the blind; with them to
the ages we magnify you.

****

Triadikon.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)raise I give to Light, the
Father, glory to Light, the Son, a hymn to Light, the ‘upright Spirit’:
one undivided Light, recognised in three Persons, God, King of all
creation.

****

Theotokion.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)oly Virgin, you appear wider
then the heavens for you contained and bore in a body God, the
uncircumscribed, for the redemption of all those who sing your praise
with undoubting faith.

****

Katavasia.

O Mother of God, since beyond speech or thought you bore in time, in
marvellous manner, him who is timeless, with one mind we the faithful
magnify you.

****

Then:

Holy is the Lord our God. ****

Exapostilarion of Easter.

Having fallen asleep in the flesh as a mortal, O King and Lord, you rose
again on the third day, raising up Adam from corruption, and abolishing
death. O Pascha of incorruption, O salvation of the world.

****

Of the Blind Man. The same melody.

Give sight, O Lord, to the eyes of my soul, maimed by gloomy sin, by
grafting in humility, O merciful, and cleansing me with tears of
repentance.

****

Another.

As he passed by, our Saviour found a blind man without sight; spitting
upon the ground and making clay he anointed him and sent him to Siloam
to go and wash; when he had washed he came seeing your light, my Christ.

****

At Lauds we insert 8 Stichera and we sing 7 of the Resurrection. Tone 5.
\[Or 3 of the Resurrection, 1 of the Blind Man and the Easter Stichera
with their verses.\]

Lord, while the grave was sealed by transgressors, you came forth from
the tomb as you had been born from the Mother of God. Your bodiless
Angels did not know how you had become incarnate; nor did the soldiers
who were guarding you know when you arose: for both are sealed for those
who enquire; but the wonders have been revealed to those who in faith
worship the mystery: grant us as we praise it joy and your great mercy.

Lord, having smashed the eternal bars and torn apart the chains, you
rose from the tomb, leaving behind the grave-clothes as proof of your
true burial for three days; and while being guarded in a cave, you went
ahead into Galilee. Great is your mercy, Saviour beyond understanding\!
Have mercy upon us.

Lord, the women ran to your tomb to see you, the Christ who had suffered
for ours sakes; and as they approached they saw with fear an Angel
sitting on the stone which had been rolled away; and he cried out to
them, saying: ‘The Lord has risen. Tell his Disciples that he who saves
our souls has risen from the dead’.

Lord, as you came out while the grave was sealed, so you came in to your
Disciples while the doors were shut, and showed them the bodily
sufferings which you had accepted, O long-suffering one. As sprung from
the David’s seed, you endured stripes, but as Son of God you freed the
world. Great is your mercy, Saviour beyond understanding\! Have mercy on
us.

****

Stichera by Anatolios.

Lord, King of the ages and maker of all, who accepted crucifixion and
burial in the flesh for our sakes, that you might free us all from Hell,
you are our God and we know no other but you.

Lord, who will recount your dazzling wonders? Who will declare your
dread mysteries? For incarnate for our sakes, as you willed, you
manifested the might of your power; for by your Cross You opened
Paradise to the Thief; by your burial you smashed the bars of Hell; and
by your Resurrection you enriched the universe. Compassionate one, glory
to you.

The Myrrhbearing women, coming very early to your grave, were seeking to
anoint you, the immortal Word and God; and instructed by the words of
the Angel they turned back with joy, declaring openly to the Apostles
that you, the life of all, had risen and granted the world pardon and
your great mercy.

****

Verse:

Look on me and have mercy on me: for I am alone and poor. ****

And of the Blind Man. Idiomel. Tone 8.

Christ our God, who took flesh through your compassionate mercy and
taking pity in your ineffable compassion on one who had been deprived of
light from the womb, you granted him divine brilliance, touching with
soil his pupils with your moulding fingers. Do you now, O provider of
light, illumine too the senses of our souls, as you alone are provider
without stinting.

Glory.

**Same Tone.**

Who will recount your powers, O Christ? Who number the multitudes of
your wonders? For twofold you appeared on earth through your goodness,
twofold also the healings you bestow: for you opened not only the bodily
eyes of one who was maimed from the womb, but also those of his soul.
Therefore he confessed you the hidden God, who grant to all your great
mercy.

Both now. You are most blessed.

\[

**Easter Verses.  
Verse:** Let God arise and let his enemies be scattered: and let those
that hate him flee before his face.

A sacred Pascha has been shown forth to us to-day, a new and holy
Pascha, a mystic Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha, a Pascha that is
Christ the Redeemer, a spotless Pascha, a Pascha of the faithful, a
Pascha that has opened to us the gates of Paradise, a Pascha that
hallows all the faithful.

****

Verse:

As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish: as wax melts before the fire.

Come from the scene, O women bearers of good tidings, and say to Zion:
Receive from us the tidings of joy, of the Resurrection of Christ.
Exult, dance and be glad, O Jerusalem, for you have seen Christ the King
as a bridegroom come forth from the tomb.

****

Verse:

So let sinners perish at the presence of God: and let the righteous be
glad.

The Myrrhbearing women at early dawn came near the tomb of the Giver of
life; they found an Angel sitting on the stone, and he, addressing them
in this manner, said: Why do you seek the living among the dead? Why do
you mourn the Incorruptible amid corruption? Go, proclaim it to his
Disciples.

****

Verse:

This is the day that the Lord has made: let us be glad and rejoice in
it.

A Pascha of delight, Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha
has dawned for us, a Pascha on which let us embrace one another with
joy. O Pascha, ransom from sorrow\! To-day Christ has shone forth from
the tomb as from a bridal chamber, and has filled the women with joy,
saying: Proclaim it to the Apostles.

Glory.

**Same Tone.**

Who will recount your powers, O Christ? Who number the multitudes of
your wonders? For twofold you appeared on earth through your goodness,
twofold also the healings you bestow: for you opened not only the bodily
eyes of one who was maimed from the womb, but also those of his soul.
Therefore he confessed you the hidden God, who grant to all your great
mercy.

Both now.

It is the day of Resurrection; let us be radiant for the festival, and
let us embrace one another. Let us say, O brethren, even to those who
hate us: let us forgive all things at the Resurrection, and so let us
cry: Christ has risen from the dead; by death he has trampled on by
death, and to those in the graves given life.\]

****

Great Doxology and Dismissal.

Before the 1st Hour, the Eothinon. Tone 8.

Mary’s hot tears did not flow in vain, for she was granted Angels to
teach her and the sight of you, O Jesu. But, as a weak woman, she still
had earthly thoughts, and therefore she was debarred from touching you,
O Christ; but still she was sent as a herald to your Disciples, to whom
she spoke the good tidings, announcing your ascent to your Father’s
realm. With her make us also worthy of your appearing, O Master and
Lord.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

