\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \]
\[ [Baptism](baptism.md) \] \[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \]
\[ [Consecration of a Church](dedic-int.md) \]
\[ [Liturgy of Saint James](lit-james.md) \]
\[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \] \[ Canon for Confession \]
\[ [Presanctified](presanctified.md) \]
\[ [Ordinations](ordinations.md) \]

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

This little known Canon in preparation for Confession is to be found in
the Greek *Great Euchologion.* As the concluding prayer makes clear, the
Confession is in preparation for Holy Communion. The prayer might well
be used as a prayer of absolution when penitents come for Confession
before the Liturgy.

The Gospel, from that according to St Mark, is translated from the
Church‘s text. Virtually all modern editions of the Greek and all modern
translations, following the reading of the best manuscripts, omit the
final verse, “But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in
heaven forgive you your offences“.

-----

# CANON OF SUPPLICATION

## TO THE

**MOST HOLY MOTHER OF GOD**

AT THE CONFESSION OF A SINNER

A Composition of Monk Euthymios, the Chancellor 

Ode 1. Tone 6. Crossing the sea.

How may I lament my sordid life, Sovereign Lady, and the multitudes of
my numberless evil deeds? What may I say to you, Pure Virgin? I am at a
loss and I quail. But help me.

From where shall I, wretch that I am, begin to tell my wicked deeds and
my dreadful offences? Also what will then become of me? But, Sovereign
Lady, before the end take pity on me also.

I have trodden every road of sins, O Immaculate, and have in no way
found the path of salvation. But I run to you, loving Lady: Do not
despise me as I repent from my soul.

I think continually on the hour of death, O All-pure, and the fearful
tribunal, but by habit I am terribly a prey of evils. But help me.

The corrupter of what is good now seeing me naked, leaderless and far
from God of godly virtues, is eager to swallow me down. Sovereign Lady,
rescue me.

Ode 3. None is holy as you.

I have shamefully befouled my soul, Sovereign Lady, Mother of God,
through numberless offences, wretch that I am. And, wholly in the grip
of despair, as I am, where may I now go?

Alas, I have defaced that which is according to God’s image by my proud
disposition, wretch that I am\! And where now may I go? But hasten, O
Virgin help me.

There is altogether none born in this life among mortals who has done
the lawless deeds of dire licentiousness as I, loving Lady; for I have
befouled divine Baptism.

I have reached the limit of evils, All-holy Virgin; but speedily help
me; for heaven and earth bitterly cry out against my numberless
outrageous acts.

Ode 4. Christ my power. 

Ranks of Angels and the armies of heaven, the Powers of your Son tremble
at your might, Pure Lady; while I, though despaired of, am in the grip
of foolhardiness.

The whole earth is amazed and trembles as it watches one who dreadfully
and wickedly does outrageous deeds.

I have wickedly befouled the temple of the body, and the Temple of Lord,
which mortals enter trembling, I the prodigal, alas, enter without
shame.

Do not make me, Sovereign Lady, do not make me a stranger, who have been
estranged from the shelter of your Son and am utterly unworthy. But wash
me clean also from the stain of my offences.

Ode 5. By your divine light, O Good One.

Adam transgressed one commandment of your Son, O Virgin, and suffered
exile. But how may I lament the abyss of my offences, I, rebel and
transgressor against God?

Cain was revealed of old as a destroyer and murderer of his brother
before he had been cursed by God. But what then shall I do who have
dared all? For I have slain my soul, and now I am not ashamed.

I have rivalled dread Esau, I have defiled soul and body by gluttony and
pleasure, befouling my life with drunkenness and lechery. Who would not
weep at me, wretch that I am.

By your divine light, O Good One, heal the passions of the soul, which
the Corrupter has sown in me. Deliver me from his bitter captivity. For
he laughs as he sees me leaderless.

Ode 6. Watching life’s sea.

My life is dissolute, my soul filthy and my life utterly wretched, while
I have defiled my whole body by wicked deeds. Therefore hasten, O Virgin
and help me.

The end is upon me and I cannot endure, loving Lady. My conscience
reproves me, for it sets before me my wicked deeds and the disorder of
my life; and I quake with fear at the tribunal of your Son, pure Virgin.

Truly, O all-pure, the fearful and unquenchable river of fire and the
unsleeping worm await the burning fever of my flesh. But deliver me from
them by your prayers.

I am in the grip of terror and I quail before the assaults of the foe,
loving Lady; for before the end the Corrupter grinds his teeth at me,
seizing me as a prisoner stripped bare of virtues.

Ode 7. An Angel made the furnace.

The Crafty One has heated the flame of my passions sevenfold and with
adulteries of the heart has slain me utterly. But with the streams of my
tears water me, Mother of God, and do not reject me.

Sovereign Lady, do not let me be drowned in the mire of my offences; for
the most evil foe, seeing me in despair, loving Lady, laughs at me. But
with your mighty hand raise me up again.

My wretched and unfeeling soul, fearful is the judgement and terrifying
and unending the punishment; but none the less fall down now before the
Mother of your Judge and God, and why did you despair of yourself?

All my hope, Sovereign Lady, I the prodigal have placed in you. Do not
turn your face away from me; do not shut your compassionate heart
against me, Mother of God, but help me.

Wretch that I am, I have become dark by the multitude of my numberless
evils, and changed for the worse in the eye and the mind of my soul.
Bring me swiftly therefore with the beams of your light to the sweetness
of dispassion.

Ode 8. From the flame you made dew well up.

Virgin Mother, who gave birth to God, one of the Trinity, and carried
him in your arms, quench the fiercely flaming furnace of the passions
and wash my soul with streams of tears.

I tremble at death’s coming, O all-pure, and do not wholly fear that
judgement; while I do not wholly cease from doing evils. Take pity and
save me by your prayers before the end.

Grant me never silent groans and a fount of tears, Sovereign Lady, that
I may wash away my many faults and incurable wounds, so that I may reach
eternal life.

I have declared to you the multitudes of my evils, for no one else in
the world has angered God, your Son and Lord, as I, Sovereign Lady.
Reconcile me to him speedily by your prayers.

Master, compassionate by nature, do not stand me with the condemned at
the hour of judgement, but at the prayers of your Mother, have mercy and
place me with the sheep at your right hand.

Ode 9. It is impossible for humans to see God.

See, I approach you, O all-pure, with great fear and love, for I, your
servant, know the strength of your fervent prayer. For the supplication
of a Mother, O all-blessed, has great strength with her Son. For he is
moved by compassion.

Take with you the Choirs of Archangels and the multitude of the hosts on
high, the Forerunner, the companies of Apostles, the Prophets, Martyrs
and Ascetics, and Martyr Bishops, and make intercession for me, pure
Virgin, to God.

May I find your help, pure Virgin, both now and at the moment when my
spirit departs. Speedily rescue me from the demons and deliver me from
their tyranny, O all-immaculate, and do not let me, loving Lady, be
handed over to them.

I await a compassionate Judge who loves mankind, your Son, pure Virgin.
Do not disdain me, but make him merciful to me, to stand me then at the
right hand of his most pure tribunal, O all-praised; for in you have I
hoped.

Principalities, Archangels, Dominions and Seraphim, Powers, Authorities
and Angels, Thrones with the many-eyed Cherubim as they and we now
honour your Offspring, Virgin Mother, we all devoutly glorify you.

Then:

It is truly right to called you blessed, who gave birth to God, ever
blessed and most pure and Mother of our God. Greater in honour than the
Cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without
corruption you gave birth to God the Word; truly the Mother of God we
magnify you.

And at once the Gospel according to Mark*  
*\[11:22-26\]

The Lord said: Have faith in God, for Amen I say to you, if anyone tells
this mountain, ‘Be taken up and thrown into the sea’, and does not doubt
in their heart, but believes that it will happen, it will be done for
them. So I tell you, whatever you ask for in prayer, believe that you
are receiving it, and it will be yours. Whenever you stand praying,
forgive, if you have anything against anyone; so that your Father in
heaven may also forgive you your offences. But if you do not forgive,
neither will your Father in heaven forgive you your offences.

Then:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy.

Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation,
pardon and forgiveness for the servant of God N.

And that he/she may be pardoned every offence, both voluntary and
involuntary.

For you, O God, are merciful and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages.

Amen.

And this Prayer of our venerable Father John of Damascus.

Let us pray to the Lord.

Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, who alone have authority to forgive
sins, as you are good and love humankind, overlook all the offences of
your servant N., both in knowledge and in ignorance, voluntary and
involuntary, in deed and word and by thought, and count him/her worthy
to partake of your divine, holy, immaculate and immortal Mysteries; not
for burdensome misery and punishment and increase of sins, but for
sanctification, illumination, purification, support, a pledge of eternal
life and your heavenly Kingdom; for a wall and help and a warding off of
every foe, for the wiping away his/her offences and for the glory of
your might. At the prayers of our most holy Lady, Mother of God, of the
honoured, heavenly, spiritual, immaterial, bodiless Powers and of all
the Saints, who have been well-pleasing to you from every age.

Amen.

. 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

