\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sunday_of_orthodoxy.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](vespers1.md) \] \[ [Synodikon](synodikon.md) \]
\[ Canon of the Synodikon \]

**CANON FOR THE SYNODIKON OF ORTHODOXY**

## INTRODUCTION

In the Triodia this Canon is ascribed to Theodore the Studite, but it
cannot be by him, since he had died several years earlier. The author is
almost certainly the Patriarch St Methodios. The troparion of the 8th
Ode which speaks of the famous Icon of Christ above the Bronze Gate of
the Palace reminds one of the poem on the subject that was written by
the Patriarch Methodios to celebrate its restoration. The rubric in the
Triodion says, ’after the Dismissal of Matins and before the Liturgy, we
go in procession, together with wood of the Cross and the revered Icons,
to the place where the Synodikon is to be read. As we go and as we
return we sing the following Canon’. If this canon was first sung in
843, it is tempting to suggest that it may have been sung as the clergy
and people made their way from the church of the Mother of God in
Blachernae, where the vigil had been celebrated, to the Great Church,
where the Liturgy was to be celebrated.

It is perhaps worth remarking that one of those present would almost
certainly have been a seventeen year old boy from Thessalonika, who had
recently been sent to Constantinople on the death of his father and
placed in the care of Theoktistos the Logothete, the Empress Theodora’s
chief minister. The young man’s name was Constantine; though he is
better known by his monastic name, Cyril — the Apostle of the Slavs.

The Canon presents a number of linguistic and historical problems, and
this translation is only provisional. One of the historical problems is
why such prominence is given to otherwise almost wholly unknown
character, Lezix, who appears here as one of the leaders of the
iconoclasts. It seems that he was subsequently reconciled to the Church
by the Patriarch himself.

The two troparia that are sung after the Canon are not without interest.
The first, which is now the Apolytikion for the day, seems to have been
a rallying song of the Iconodules, for we read in the life of St
Theodore the Studite that shortly after the exile of Patriarch
Nikephoros and the removal of the icons, St Theodore organised a solemn
procession of the icons, during which this troparion was sung. In his
Life we read that ‘he ordered all the monks under him to take the icons
in their hands, hold them high and then march round the whole circuit of
the monastery, sing the hymn, “We worship your most pure icon, loving
Lord”, together with other hymns of victory to Christ the Victor. This
took place on the glorious feast of Palms, which we all believers
celebrate before the Passion and Resurrection of the Master’ \[PG
99:185\].

The other troparion formed part of the ancient office for the First
Sunday of Lent, which was dedicated to the Prophets, in particular
Moses, Aaron and Samuel. The three are found together in Psalm 96:6,
’Moses and Aaron were among his priests: and Samuel among those that
call upon his name’. The present Gospel for this Sunday is also a
survival from the ancient office, and it was chosen presumably because
of the words of the Apostle Philip to Nathaniel, ’We have found the one
about whom Moses wrote in the law, and also the prophets, Jesus, son of
Joseph, from Nazareth’.

-----

## CANON FOR THE SYNODIKON OF ORTHODOXY

By Methodios

Ode 1. Tone 6. Helper and Protector.

Let us believers sing a song of thanksgiving to our God, the Benefactor
of all things, for he has raised up a saving horn for us, a mighty
kingdom, a champion of Orthodoxy. \[Twice\]

Truly divine grace has appeared to the inhabited world, glory and honour
have appeared, the Church leaps for joy, having received the robe of its
own baring.

Christ’s tunic, previously rent by John the deceiver and poisoner, the
godly Fathers have now woven and given to the Church.

The Church, having taken up the Lord’s form, rejoices and leaps with
gladness with her children, as she has received from him prizes of
victory, symbols of Orthodoxy.

Let the haters, dreadful Lizix and Antony with John and Theodore, both
deniers of the faith, be ashamed and turned back.

Iannes and Iambres, who opposed Moses the Lawgiver of old, were put to
shame; while now John the deceiver is truly routed with Antony.

You tore apart the faction of God’s foes, O Christ, and have now
restored to the Church her robe, the Church for which you poured out
your blood, as you are good.

Glory.

I contemplate you, O Trinity, and worship your divine might; deliver me
from trials of every kind, for I believe in you, Father, Son and
all-holy Spirit.

Both now. **Theotokion.**

Wearing from you the royal robe, O Virgin, God appeared to mortals in
human form, double in being; the form of his form we hold in veneration.

Ode 3. Establish, Lord.

Rejoice, all you choirs of Fathers and Apostles, as you behold the
worship of the Icons, which you clearly handed down. \[Twice\]

Let the all-unblemished Church cry out, ‘I have received my beauty and
put on my robe, of which John had stripped me’.

Be ashamed, you lawless, who battle against the Lord, for he was
incarnate and has been made manifest in an image, which we embrace in a
relative manner.

Who would speak out the foul doctrines and lawless teachings of the
insane John, expounding Delphic ways?

Anathema to Lizix and John, with Antony, Theodore the godless
blasphemer, together with insane Theodotos\!

The blood shed for the divine likeness of the incarnate Master cries
out; blood that was shed by John.

The Lord has expelled the horde of aliens and has given back to his own
what was theirs. Glory to his goodness\!

Glory.

Let us worship with right belief the will that is without beginning, the
authority and sovereign power of the Trinity, ever rejecting Arius.

Both  now. Theotokion.

We confess you to be truly the Sovereign Lady who gave birth to God,
heeding not the words of Nestorios, but the doctrines of the Fathers.

Ode 4. The prophet heard.

Rejoice with gladness, O Church, and every city, town and village; let
the monasteries be opened and the nunneries adorned. Let then fittingly
worship the relics and icons of the Martyrs.

Christ invites you\! Now godly Fathers assemble with eagerness and
recount, like the Apostles, the spectacle of his Incarnation, his
miracles and his sufferings, as the Sacred Gospel writes.

Assemble rejoicing with boldness, you multitudes of monks, for though
they were evilly strong, the cowards have again been worsted, and
whatever counsel such men counselled, the Lord will scatter.

The stripes of the Fathers, the blood shed by their blows have truly
ceased; continuous exiles are no more, and peace is being established
for all. No longer does the work of magic have force; for ‘God is with
us’.

The vine of evil spread out its branches of impiety and flowered with
the bitter grape cluster, and their wine was the rag of the dragon, from
which they truly gave the Lord’s people the evil-minded drink.

They defiled your Temple with unlawful ordinations for money, and they
have been canonically cast out and are fallen from divine glory: Simon
Magus, and with him John and Antony.

Against the wild beasts and enemies of God, foul Antony, the traitor,
John, of satanic mind and enemy of the Church, assembled like fierce
wolves, let us believers shout out three times, ‘Anathema\!’.

Glory.

O uncreated Monarchy, Father, Son and Spirit, we worship you, whose
praise the many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim sing, as they
cry, ‘Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O Highest and Almighty\!’

Both now. Theotokion.

Holier than the holies, higher than all creatures you were named, O
Virgin Mother, who bore your own Creator; therefore we offer worship to
your holy form, O Birth-giver of God.

Ode 5. Rising in the night.

Christ has conquered\! Let earth leap for joy\! Tumult has ceased; the
weeping of the Lord’s servants too has ceased; while everywhere the
Faith has been unfurled for the world. \[Twice\]

Seeing the Crucifixion in an Icon, we love it with reverence, greeting
Christ and his symbols, and we worship them, but do not honour them as
gods.

The garrulous and blasphemous spirit of Lyzikos has ceased, that
continually by day and night spoke out against the divine image of
Christ and his Saints.

Why, thrice wretched man, do you hate the immaculate image of Christ’s
incarnation and of all the Saints? For surely we believers do not
worship dumb idols, do we?

Lighting on instruments of impiety, they assembled a synod of impious
priests against God most high, like the Jews, Annas and Caiaphas, of
old.

On the day of judgement, most wretched man, the company of the Fathers
will stand as accusers of your godless soul; the Fathers who flesh you
stripped bare with unnumbered blows.

All the Churches will shout aloud, crying that they were all deprived by
you of the image of the Lord and of his Saints, the holy Icons.

Glory.

Glory to you who sustain the universe by your might\! Glory to you,
Unity in Three Persons, Father, Son and Spirit, deliver from harm of
every kind those who believe in you.

Both now. Theotokion.

We reverence you, Sovereign Lady and Virgin, as the beauteous golden
lamp that gave birth for the world to the spiritual light and diminished
the misty fog.

Ode 6. I cried from my whole heart.

The unsleeping guardians of Christ’s Church cried out, asking him that
she be given peace. He heard and was attentive to their prayer.
\[Twice\]

The game traps of the deceiver have been exposed by the teachings of the
Fathers, and God, who is uncircumscribed in his Godhead, formed in flesh
is praised.

Fellow workers of error, be ashamed\! And let Theodotos and Lizix and
Theodore, that abyss of destruction, be destroyed with Antony.

You opened your mouth, you wretch, not in spiritual songs, but in
blasphemies against your Master, rejecting the honourable fashioning of
Icons.

You overthrew the doctrines of the Fathers and the teachings of the
Apostles, writing against them in accordance with your lawless cult,
John, enemy of Christ.

The smoke of your tears filled the eyes of the devout; but with the wind
of the godly Teachers they have been dispersed, demented John.

You ripped apart the divine robe, like Arius of old Christ’s tunic,
therefore you have been cast out of the Church like a dog.

Glory.

I glorify one source of Godhead in three hypostases; for God is one,
Father, Son and Spirit; though distinct in characteristics and persons.

Both now. Theotokion.**

Prophetically, Pure Maiden glorified by God, you were revealed as City
of God, from which your Maker was born, preserving you after
childbearing as you were before.

Ode 7. We have sinned, we have offended.

Divine grace has now quenched the furnace of heresy, consuming the
spiritual Chaldeans, bedewing the servants of the Trinity, who had been
held in its flames for four weeks of years. \[Twice\]

The Church is adorned, robed, made fair with the form of the Master of
all things, of his incarnation and sufferings, bearing their symbols to
the end, in accordance with God’s laws.

The Lord’s people that bears Christ’s name celebrates, keeps festival,
seeing the Church once again resplendent with the beauty of the divine
form, which, though being God, he bore as human in order to save us.

In flesh the Word was poor and hungry and thirsty, these being the
attributes of the human nature, through which he is circumscribed;
though in hid Godhead he is simple and uncircumscribed.

The monstrosities and wizardries of the enemy of Christ have been
destroyed, for he has been revealed as equal of the Greeks, inflated by
their writings, which the voices of the just have utterly destroyed.

What tongue will recount your most damaging and soul destroying
doctrines or the utterance of your belly, falsely named John and
forerunner of the Antichrist Satan?

There was no need for you to be so named, but rather Pythagoras,
Chronos, and Apollo, whose manner of life you rivalled, delighting in
your impieties.

Glory.

Eternal, all-powerful, beyond understanding; we believers all worship a
Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, and let us confess them without
confusion as we cry, ‘Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O God\!’

Both now. Theotokion.

Sure Bridge for Christians, the boast of the faithful and their refuge;
Sovereign Lady, Mother of God, you alone are she that helps all and
saves them from dangers.

Ode 8. Whom the armies of Heaven.

Believers, let us all rejoice like the prophets and let us mystically be
glad, for this is the day on which Christ the Word gave back to the
Church his own robe.

Lezix and John, the yoke of Beliar, ranged themselves in serried ranks
as for against Christ’s image, assaulting the Church with axe of
wickedness. 

Who would not grieve on seeing the outrageous act of daring, the divine
image over the Bronze gate of the palace, stoned by lawless men on
John’s instruction.

How do you not understand, blind wretch, darkened in mind, when you see
that all under heaven has been adorned with Christ’s imprint; but alone
you had the understanding of the Jews?

You thought you would utterly destroy the incarnate Image of the Lord
and all the saints from the holy Churches; but divine grace has
destroyed your tyranny.

Dread Lezix, along with John, the deniers of true religion, lawlessly
said they would in no way worship the sacred relics of the saints and
their Icons.

Glory.

As we all devoutly reverence the all-creating Divine Power in three
Forms, the Father who has no beginning, the Word and the Spirit that
shines out with them, let us glorify to the ages.

Both now. Theotokion.

Sure bridge of Christians, boast of the faithful and their refuge,
Sovereign Lady and Mother of God, you alone help all and save them from
dangers.

Ode 9.* *Conception without seed.

Nations, clap your hands; choirs of Father, hurry; Ascetics and those in
the mountains, come together; you, that of old were persecuted by John
the impious deceiver, have come publicly to heap scorn on wizardry and
spells. \[Twice\]

Desert, rejoice, with the whole inhabited world; all you mountains, drop
down sweetness; hills, be glad, for Christ, the Word, has given peace to
those on earth, and to the godly Churches unity of faith.

The God of just sentences has now pronounced with freedom; Christ has
appeared, giving strength today to godly Teachers to proclaim boldness
his condescension and to depict with sureness his incarnation in icons.

Longsuffering Lord, how wonderful are your works\! Who will number your
love for  humankind? Who, when they see your Priests and Ascetics slain
for the sake of your Icon, would not burn up the deceivers? But you,
when insulted, endured.

Lord, who fixed the Church unshaken – and the gates of Hell did not
prevail – grant your peace to your people, that we may all sincerely
worship you with a single hymn of glory and glorify you.

Let all who do not honour the imprint of your embodying, Master, stand
under anathema; above all John, with Antony and impious Theodore,
Theodotos and all the rest of the opponents of the Faith.

Master, who gave your peace to your Apostles, now too grant your calm to
all, with your hand gathering the scattered, and number them as rational
sheep in the sheepfold of your holy Church.

Glory.

I glorify the Godhead of Father, Son and Spirit, the One Nature in Three
Hypostases. Essence Undivided, Separate in Persons, one single kingship,
almighty sovereignty that holds the universe in being.

Both now. Theotokion.

Help, protection and assistance  of all, O Mother of God, show that you
can intercede for all those who take refuge in you and that you drive
away the impious by the power of your Son; for as Mother you can do all
things.

And when we reach the appointed place, we say the Troparion:

We worship your most pure Icon…

Glory. Both now. Another. Tone 2*.*

The choir of the Prophets gladly rejoices today with Moses and Aaron,
because the Cross, bringing the end of prophecy, shines out, by which
you saved us. At their intercessions, Christ our God, save our souls.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

