\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \] \[ Catechesis 103 \]
\[ [Catechesis 40](ths40.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 49](catechesis_49.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 60-64](ths60-64.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 66 & 67](ths66-67.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

# CATECHESIS 103

On keeping God’s commandments  
and the just threat against those who neglect them.[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

Brethren and fathers, God, who fashioned us and brought us out of
non-existence into being,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) has placed us in this life as
in a schoolroom to learn to gospel of his kingdom. For this reason too,
when he sent out his disciples to preach, he gave them this command, ‘Go
and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe everything
that I have commanded you’.[\[3\]](#_ftn3) But what are the things he
commanded? According to the old covenant, to summarise, ‘You shall not
murder, you shall not commit adultery, you shall not steal, you shall
not bear false witness’.[\[4\]](#_ftn4) According to the new, things
that are higher and more precise. For Scripture says, ‘it was said to
those of old, ‘You shall not murder’; whoever commits murder will be
liable to judgement. But I say to you, everyone who is angry with their
brother without good cause will be liable to judgement’.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)
Again, ‘it was said to those of old,[\[6\]](#_ftn6) ‘You shall not
commit adultery’. But I say to you, everyone who looks at a woman with
lust has already committed adultery with her in his
heart’.[\[7\]](#_ftn7) Again, ‘it was said, ‘You shall not commit
perjury’. But I say to you, you are not to swear at all’.[\[8\]](#_ftn8)
Again, ‘it was said, ‘You shall love your neighbour and hate you enemy’.
But I say to you, Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good
to those who hate you’.[\[9\]](#_ftn9) Do you see how great the
difference is between the two covenants? The one forbids the acts
themselves, while the other the impulses from which the acts come, so
that sin may not put down roots from there. If then we are found to be
living in accordance with neither law nor Gospel, but rather, as one
might say, with paganism, what shall we suffer on that
day?[\[10\]](#_ftn10) ‘Do not be led astray’, Scripture says, ‘neither
fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers nor male prostitutes nor
Sodomites nor thieves nor extortioners nor drunkards nor slanderers nor
robbers will inherit the kingdom of God’.[\[11\]](#_ftn11) And for this
reason, as I have often declared by way of putting you on your guard and
do so now, let no one live on their own, behave without discretion,
amass money, acquire a slave; let no one be a horse breeder or cattle
herdsman or engage in any activity[\[12\]](#_ftn12) beyond the rule
under persecution.[\[13\]](#_ftn13) From these come greater and more
serious sins. Nevertheless there are some of you who, being disobedient,
disobey, and being quarrelsome, quarrel with the truth. And I, your poor
Abbot,[\[14\]](#_ftn14) ‘am not responsible for the blood of any of you,
for I have not shrunk from declaring to you’ God’s ordinance, nor by,
keeping silent, have I failed to reveal the sword that is coming ‘upon
those who disobey’.[\[15\]](#_ftn15) ‘Or are we provoking the Lord to
jealousy? Are we stronger than he?’[\[16\]](#_ftn16) ‘The axe is already
being laid to the root of the trees. Therefore every tree that does not
bear good fruit will be cut down and thrown onto the
fire’.[\[17\]](#_ftn17)

Are you frightened by this example?[\[18\]](#_ftn18) Do you not tremble
at the threat? Are you not afraid of death, which we shall all
face[\[19\]](#_ftn19) in a little while? How are we to look on the
fearsome angels, as they come to take us from the body? How are we to
journey on that long and unending road, if we have not obtained the
necessities for the journey? How are we to take our stand at the
judgement seat of Christ, to whom ‘every knee shall bow and every tongue
confess’,[\[20\]](#_ftn20) if we have a bad conscience? Will we not
inevitably be sent away from there to the place ‘where the fire is not
quenched and the worm does not die’,[\[21\]](#_ftn21) where there is
‘weeping and gnashing of teeth’.[\[22\]](#_ftn22) But, brethren, so
that this does not happen, ‘Come, let us worship and let us weep to our
good God. Let us come into his presence with
confession’,[\[23\]](#_ftn23) supplication, compunction, tears,
prayers, fasts, purity and every form of good conduct. ‘He is expiation
for our sins’,[\[24\]](#_ftn24) and he has not shut the doors against
us, he has not turned away from someone who turns back, but he lets them
approach like the harlot, the prodigal and the thief. Yes, brethren, I
beg you, let us stand up, let us rouse ourselves and let us compete, so
that, like school children, who are ready learners, when they are
dismissed, go home rejoicing, we too, as genuine disciples of the
Gospel, when we have been dismissed from the life here, may depart with
joy for the everlasting life in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom belong
glory and might, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever
and to the ages of ages. Amen.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) The current Moscow edition of the *Lenten Triodion*
gives this catechesis, in a Russian translation, for the Sunday of the
Tax Collector and the Pharisee, though there is nothing to suggest this
either in the text itself or in the numbering of the Greek
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">mss</span>., where it is numbered
116. The series for the Triodion begins with number 13 in Greek, for the
Wednesday before Meat Sunday. 

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) A quotation from the Anaphora of St John Chrysostom.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Mat. 18:19-20.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Exodus 20:13-15.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Mat. 5:21-22. The words ‘without good cause’ (one
word in Greek) are not in many ancient
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">mss</span>. nor in some of the
versions and are generally rejected by  contemporary scholars, but are
part of the Church’s text. The latest edition of Liddell and Scott adds
this meaning to the article in question, citing a number of passages
from Demosthenes for it.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Most modern editors omit ‘to those of old’ in this
verse.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Mat. 5:27-28.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Mat. 5:33-34.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Mat. 5:43-44.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) The day of judgement. The phrase, without further
explanation, is found already in the New Testament. Cf. Mat. 7:22, 2
Timothy 1:18 and 4:8. 

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) 1 Cor. 6:9-10. The exact meaning of some of these
terms is much disputed, as a glance at the many contemporary
commentaries and versions of the New Testament will show. Neither St
John Chrysostom nor Theodoret comment on the individual categories.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) This meaning is not attested in the lexica.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) One of a number of references by St Theodore to the
problems of keeping community life and discipline when the brotherhood
is in exile and dispersed.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Literally, ‘And I, the humble,’ but this is most
unnatural in English and I have taken the liberty of trying to convey a
tone of voice rather than the ‘literal’ sense of the words.

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) Colossians 3:6. The Greek has ‘sons of
disobedience’, which is a Semitism for ‘the disobedient’, but the word
‘sons’ is particularly apposite in the context of a monastic
brotherhood. The phrase in the New Testament refers to those who oppose
God. Cf. also Ephesians 2:2 and 5:6.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) 1 Cor. 10:22.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Mat. 3:10.

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Cf. Hebrews 4:11.

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) The use of this verb suggests that St Theodore may
be thinking of Malachy 3:2. 

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Isaias 45:23, Rom. 14:11 and cf. Phil 2:10-11.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) Isa. 66:24, Mark 9:48. St Theodore reverses the two
clauses.

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) Mat. 8:12. The phrase occurs six times in Matthew
and once in Luke.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) This is a free citation of Psalm 94 vv. 6 and 2.
The actual expression ‘good God’ does not occur in Scripture, except
predicatively in Psalm 72:1. The Greek word *exomologesis* means both
‘thanksgiving’ and ‘confession’ (sc. ‘of sins’). The latter is clearly
the meaning St Theodore intends here, and this is why he has put verse 2
after verse 6, to make the beginning of his list 

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) 1 John 2:2.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

