\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 103](catechesis_103.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 40](ths40.md) \] \[ Catechesis 49 \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 60-64](ths60-64.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 66 & 67](ths66-67.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

# CATECHESIS 49

## On self-mastery and our present confession.  
On Friday of Meat Week

[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

Brethren and fathers, most people call the present days ‘feasts’,
because of they get drunk and debauched during them, not understanding
that these days demand abstinence from meat, not indulgence in
drunkenness and intoxication. That is proper to a pagan feast; it is the
business of Christians to exercise self-control ‘and not to satisfy the
desires of the flesh’,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) as the Apostle teaches.
Nevertheless evil has progressed into law and leads the world as it
wishes. But let us, brethren, flee intemperance even in partaking of
things that are permitted, for we know that intemperance is the mother
of sin. For our forefather Adam, as long as he abstained from the
forbidden food in Paradise, rejoiced and was made glad by divine visions
and filled with divine revelations; but when he acted intemperately and
partook of the tree of disobedience, he was at once exiled from the
delight of Paradise and intemperance for him became the begetter of
death. So too the inhabitants of Sodom behaved wantonly ‘with food in
abundance’,[\[3\]](#_ftn3) and drew down upon themselves the anger of
God and were overwhelmed with fire and brimstone. So too Esau the hated,
entrapped by gluttonous eyes, exchanged his birth right for a
meal.[\[4\]](#_ftn4) ‘But the people of God sat down to eat and drink,
and arose to play’.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) These are the sort of things that are
going on during these days; for revels and inebriation, shouting and
demonic leapings require not only the day but most of the night as well.
So intemperance is an evil, and through it death entered the world. But
we should give thanks to God, brethren loved by the Lord, because he has
rescued us from such empty behaviour and transferred us to this blessed
life, in which there is not intemperance, but moderation; not
drunkenness, but vigilance; not disturbance, but peace; not hubbub, but
tranquillity; not abuse, but thanksgiving; not wantonness, but purity,
holiness and temperance. From this it was that our inspired fathers
sprang up,[\[6\]](#_ftn6) who with God trampled down the passions,
expelled demons, rivalled angels, performed signs from God, attained
heavenly glory, were a cause of wonder in the world. One of them was the
blessed Antony, whose life we have been reading; and we have learnt how
God magnified him in this world under heaven, so that the kings of the
earth thought it important to write to him and to hear from him a
written voice.

And so we too, humble wretches, follow their way of life; and that we
imitate it our monastic profession bears witness, our denial of the
world, estrangement from fatherland, race, friends and intimates, our
subjection, our obedience, this present confession, for which we have
also been persecuted. Accordingly, let us rejoice and congratulate one
another that we have been given these gifts of grace by God, and that we
are leading a spiritual life, in which it is always open to us to keep
festival every day, should we so wish, and to rejoice with
unlimited[\[7\]](#_ftn7) joy. Therefore I beg you, let us hold mightily
to our ascetic practice and this confession, for a word has gone out
that the Mighty[\[8\]](#_ftn8) is keeping an eye on our affairs and
doubtless a royal official will suddenly arrive.[\[9\]](#_ftn9) But
don’t be scared at what has been said. ‘If God is on our side, who is
against us?’[\[10\]](#_ftn10) And if he helped us in the past, how would
he not help in the future? Only let us stand nobly, only let us
attend[\[11\]](#_ftn11) without faltering, and he himself will give
power to all who lead to the end a life that is well-pleasing to him to
gain the kingdom of heaven in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be the
glory and the power with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) This Instruction is suggested for the Sunday of the
Prodigal Son by the current Slavonic Triodion from Moscow, which only
gives Catecheses for the Sundays of these weeks.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Rom. 13:14.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Ezekiel 16.49.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Cf. Genesis 25:29-34 and Mal. 1: Esau I hate.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Exod. 32:6.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) The verb *anatello* means to ‘rise up’, sometimes of
the sun, at others of plants, and is used metaphorically of people with
either image understood. In this passage the idea of plants is the one
of which  St Theodore is thinking.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) This adjective, *amuretos*,  is not in the lexica.
The Greek editor suggests, ‘incorruptible’, ‘unending’, though he gives
no reasons.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) That is to say the Emperor. St Theodore plays on the
words ‘mightily’, *krataios*, and ‘mighty’, *kraton*’. 

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) This echoes the troparion from the Midnight Office,
‘The Judge will come suddenly and the deeds of each will be laid
bare’. St Theodore implies that it is not only the just Judge who
arrives suddenly.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Romans 8:31.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) St Theodore in these two clauses deliberately
echoes the deacon’s invitation at the beginning of the anaphora. Hence
my somewhat unidiomatic translation of *prosechomen*. The present
subjunctive of continuous action here contrasts neatly with the aorist
of immediate action in the Liturgy.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

