\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](cheese_week.md) \]
\[ [Monday Vespers](CheeseMonVes.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Vespers](CheeseTueVes.md) \] \[ Wednesday Vespers \]
\[ [Thursday Vespers](CheeseThuVes.md) \]
\[ [Cheese Sunday](cheese.md) \]

# WEDNESDAY OF CHEESE WEEK

## AT VESPERS

****

At

Lord, I have cried **the Stichera from the Octoichos and the Menaion.**

After

O Joyful Light **Prokeimenon of the day as follows.**

Tone 5.

Save me, O God, by the power of your name, \* and vindicate me by your
might.

****

Verse:

Hear my prayer, O God, and listen to the words of my mouth.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Joel.  
\[

**4,12-21**\]

Thus says the Lord: Let all the nations rouse themselves and go up to
the Valley of Iosaphat, because there I will sit to judge the nations
round about. Put out the sickle, for the harvest is here. Come out and
tread, for the wine press is full. The vats are overflowing, for their
evils have been multiplied. Sounds have re-echoed in the valley of
judgement, for the day of the Lord is near in the valley of judgement.
Sun and moon will grow dark together, and the stars will hide their
light. But the Lord will cry aloud in Sion and will utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and heaven and earth will be shaken. But the Lord will spare
his people and strengthen the children of Israel. And you will know that
I am the Lord your God, who dwell on Sion my holy mountain, and
foreigners will pass through it no longer. And it will come to pass on
that day that the mountains will drip sweetness and the hills flow with
milk, and all the channels of Juda will flow with waters; and a spring
will go out from the Lord’s house and water the torrent of the reeds.
Egypt will be for destruction and Idumea a plain of destruction, because
of the injustices done to the children of Juda, for they spilled just
blood in their land. But Judea will be inhabited for ever and Jerusalem
to generations of generations. And I will seek out their blood and not
spare them. And the Lord will dwell in Sion.

****

Prokeimenon. Tone 6.

\[**Psalm 130**\]

Let Israel hope in the Lord, from now and for ever.

****

Verse:

** Lord, my heart has not been exalted, nor have my eyes become lofty.
****

At the Aposticha, the following Idiomel twice.  
Tone 3.

The springtime of the fast has dawned, and the flower of repentance has
sprung up. Therefore, brethren, let us purify ourselves from all
defilement. As we sing to the Giver of light, let us say, ‘Glory to you,
only lover of humankind\!’

****

Verse 1.

To you I lift up my eyes, to you who are enthroned in the heavens. As
the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master: or as the eyes of
a maid toward the hand of her mistress, so our eyes look to the Lord our
God: until he show us his mercy.

The springtime of the fast has dawned, and the flower of repentance has
sprung up. Therefore, brethren, let us purify ourselves from all
defilement. As we sing to the Giver of light, let us say, ‘Glory to you,
only lover of humankind\!’

****

Verse 2.

Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we have our fill of
derision; our soul has its fill. Mockery for those at ease: and derision
for the proud. ****

Of the Martyrs.

Your Martyrs, O Lord, supported by faith, confirmed by hope, united in
soul by love of your Cross, destroyed the tyranny of the foe, and having
gained their crowns they intercede with the Bodiless Powers on behalf of
our souls.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Theotokion.**

Lady, honoured first of saints, praise of the heavenly Orders, hymn of
the Apostles, summary of the Prophets, accept also our supplications.

****

After the Trisagion, Apolytikion of the day etc. And Dismissal.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

