\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](ordinations.md) \]
\[ [Presbyter](presbyter.md) \] \[ Deacon \]
\[ [Woman Deacon](woman_deacon.md) \]

# ORDER FOR THE ORDINATION OF A DEACON

After the Bishop has said the ekphonesis:* *And the mercies of our great
God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, shall be with all of you, \[two
Subdeacons take the candidate to the middle of the church, with one hand
on his neck and with the other holding his hands; and they bow him as
low as possible. One Deacon in the Sanctuary says ** Give the
order.[\[1\]](#_ftn1) They bring the candidate forward and bow him down
again; and another Deacon says: Give the order. They bring him near the
Holy Doors and bow him low before the Bishop, who is seated on his small
throne in front of the Altar, slightly to the left. The Archdeacon says:
** Give the order, Holy Master.\] Then two Deacons come from the
Sanctuary and take the one who is to be ordained Deacon, who is standing
on the Solea, and bring him into the Sanctuary, circling the Altar as
they sing the following Troparia\[, which are repeated by the
Singers\]*:*

Tone 7.

Holy Martyrs, who fought the good fight and were crowned, intercede with
the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Glory to you, Christ God, boast of Apostles, joy of Martyrs, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

Tone 5.

Isaias dance: the Virgin has conceived and given birth to a Son,
Emmanuel, who is both God and man. Orient is his name, whom we magnify
as we call the Virgin blessed.

\[The candidate each time kisses the four corners of the Altar and knee
of the Bishop on his epigonation.\]**

Then he approaches the Bishop and is signed three times on the head.
After this the Bishop orders him to be ungirded and the towel to be
removed. Then the one to be ordained leans his forehead \[on his hands,
which he has laid crossed and palms downward\] on the Holy Table and
bends his right knee. When the Archdeacon has exclaimed Let us attend,
the Bishop, with his right hand placed on the head of the ordinand,
declaims:

Divine grace, which always heals what is infirm and completes what is
lacking, ordains N., the most devout Subdeacon, as Deacon. Let us
therefore pray for him, that the grace of the All-Holy Spirit may come
upon him.

And at once* *Lord, have mercy ** is chanted three times by those in the
Sanctuary ** \[by those on the right and three times by those on the
left\] and ** \[in the same way\] by those outside. The Bishop signs his
head three times, and when the Deacon has said Let us pray to the Lord,
the Bishop, with his hand on the head of the ordinand prays as follows
in a low voice:**

Lord, our God, by your foreknowledge you send down the gift of your Holy
Spirit upon those who are appointed by your inscrutable power to become
ministers and to assist in the service of your most pure Mysteries. Keep
this man also, Master, whom you have been well pleased to ordain through
me to the ministry of the Diaconate, in all soberness, holding the
mystery of faith with a pure conscience. Give him the grace which you
gave to Stephen the Protomartyr, whom you also called first to the work
of your service. Count him worthy to administer in accordance with what
is well pleasing to you the rank that has been given him by your loving
kindness — for those who have served well, gain for themselves a fair
rank — and show him to be your perfect servant. For yours is the Kingdom
and the power and the glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit,
now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

After the* *Amen ** the Archdeacon says in a quiet voice, such that the
Deacons present can hear and respond, the following Diaconal Litany:**

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop N., for his Priesthood, for help, continuance, peace,
health, salvation and for the work of his hands, let us pray to the
Lord.

For the servant of God N*.*, who is now ordained Deacon, and for his
salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That our God who loves mankind will grant that his Diaconate may be
without spot or blemish, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful
who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

**While this is being said the Bishop, keeping his hand on the head of
the candidate, prays as follows in a low voice:**

God our Saviour, with your immortal voice you laid down for your
Apostles the law of the Diaconate and declared the Protomartyr Stephen
to be one, and proclaimed him the first to fulfil the work of the
Deacon, as it is written in your Holy Gospel: Whoever wishes to be first
among you, let him be your deacon. Master of all things, fill this
servant of yours, whom you have counted worthy to enter upon the
ministry of the Deacon, with all faith, love, power and sanctification
by the indwelling of your holy and life-giving Spirit; for it is not by
the laying on of my hands, but by the visitation of your rich acts of
compassion that grace is given to your worthy ones, so that he, having
become free of every sin, may take his stand before you without blame on
the dread day of your judgement, and receive the unfailing reward of
your promise. For you are our God, and to you we give glory, with the
Father and the Holy Spirit, now and forever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.

And after the Amen he places the Orarion of the newly ordained on his
left shoulder, saying: Axios\! And this is normally chanted three times
by those in the Sanctuary, and three times by the Singers.**

\[Then the Bishop gives him the Cuffs, likewise saying: ** Axios\! And
this is normally chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary, and
three times by the Singers.\]**

Then the Bishop gives him a Fan, likewise saying:* *Axios\! ** \[And
this is normally chanted three times by those in the Sanctuary, and
three times by the Singers.\] And all the Deacons kiss him.**

**The newly ordained, taking the Fan, stands on the right-hand side of
the Holy Table and fans above the Holy Things. The other Deacon stands
outside the Sanctuary and says:**

Having commemorated all the Saints, again and again in peace, let us
pray to the Lord, **etc.****

**At the moment of Communion the newly ordained Deacon partakes of the
divine Mysteries first, before all the other Deacons, and says the
Diaconal Litany in its place, that is to say:**

Stand upright. Having received the holy, divine, immortal, ** **etc.**

This is the order when there is a complete Liturgy. But when the
ordination takes place at the Liturgy of the Presanctified, it is to be
noted that after the Presanctified Gifts have been placed on the Holy
Table, before the Deacon says:* *Let us complete our evening prayer to
the Lord, the candidate is brought forward and the Ordination takes
place as we have described.**

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) In Greek *Kelefsate*. This is said twice in the
plural and the third time in the singular, addressed to the Bishop. The
latter is the exact equivalent of the Latin *Jube, Domne*, as in the old
rite for Compline, *Jube, Domne, benedicere*. The meaning is really
something like, ‘If you please’, ‘With your permission’. The same
expression is used when a Bishop presides Vespers or a Vigil. The
canonarch announces the Tone to be sung by saying to the Bishop, ‘With
your permission, holy Master, Tone *x*’. At an ordination the expression
is, in effect, the request for the clergy, the people and the Bishop to
give their consent to the candidate’s ordination. The cry ‘Axios\!’,
‘Worthy\!’, occurs after the ordination has taken place.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

