\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \]
\[ [Baptism](baptism.md) \] \[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \] \[ Consecration of a Church \]
\[ [Liturgy of Saint James](lit-james.md) \]
\[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \]
\[ [Canon for Confession](canon_for_confession.md) \]
\[ [Presanctified](presanctified.md) \]
\[ [Ordinations](ordinations.md) \]

[Typikon](typikon.md)\
[Vespers](dedic-ves.md)\
[Matins](dedic-mat.md)\
[The Rite](therite.md)

 

INTRODUCTION
============

This translation into English of the services for the Dedication of a
Church was made at the request of His Eminence Archbishop Gregorios of
Thyateira and Great Britain. It is based on the fourth edition of the
booklet issued by the *Apostoliki Diakonia* in Athens in 1992, though
the older text in the *Large Euchologion* has also been taken into
account. Since the translation was intended for practical use, it has
been completed by the inclusion of many of those things that Greek
liturgical books tend to take for granted, but which singers and readers
often overlook. The role of the people has usually been indicated by
using the word ‘People’, rather than ‘Singers’, or ‘Choir’, who
represent them.

The rite in the *Large Euchologion* and the modern booklet includes the
texts for Vespers and Matins as well as a number of other rites, such as
those for consecrating Antimensia, chalices and patens, that for the
washing of the Altar on Holy Thursday and the various rites for
reconsecrating desecrated Churches. These last are not included here.

The present Greek rite for the Consecration of a Church seems to have
undergone a radical revision at some time between the publication at
Venice in 1638 of the *Euchologion* used by Goar for his edition and
that published at Venice in 1862, which forms the basis of the current
edition of the *Large Euchologion*, such as that published by *Astir* at
Athens in 1970. The text of the rite in the Venetian edition of 1862 is
in fact that of the edition published in Bucharest in 1703. In the
earlier rite, which is still that found in the Slavonic books, the
procession and solemn entry of the relics form the climax of the
ceremony, which begins with the consecration and vesting of the altar.
That this is the correct order is evident from the incoherent ending of
the present Greek rite, in which, immediately after the final two
prayers, the Deacon appears to announce a procession from the Church,
‘Let us go forth in peace’. No procession follows, but at once we have a
Prokeimenon, Apostle and Gospel, the latter without an ‘Alleluia’. After
this the Bishop fills and lights the first lamp in the new Church. Two
stichera, the Trisagion prayers and the Apolytikia of the Saint and the
Dedication are followed by the a litany and the Dismissal. The Apostle
and Gospel are really those for the following Liturgy and are not part
of the rite of Dedication. There is also some confusion over the final
Litany. The text of the 1992 book gives the shortened form of the Litany
of Fervent Supplication found in a number of rites, such as those for
Baptism and Marriage, whereas the *Diataxis* given earlier in the book
prescribes the closing Litany of Matins, ‘Let us complete our morning
prayer to the Lord’. The relics, which have been solemnly brought to the
Church earlier, were accompanied by lights and therefore, unless the
latter were left outside the building, there seems little point in the
solemn lighting of the first lamp in the new Church at the very end of
the service, after which, the rubric informs us, ‘The people are
permitted to light lamps and candles’.

The older form of the rite is that presupposed in the description by St
Nicolas Cabasilas in his Book 5 of *On Life in Christ* and by his near
contemporary, Saint Symeon of Thessaloniki. The latter specifically
excludes from the building for the first part of the ceremony the laity
\[pg 145:309-312\], who enter the newly consecrated building for the
first time in solemn procession with the Bishop carrying the relics of
the Martyrs.

The other notable difference is that the procession of the relics itself
is much simpler in the older rite, without any Apostles or Gospels and
without the singing of the third and sixth Odes of the Canon. In the
Litany of Peace before the Consecration of the Altar, the current rite
includes the petition ‘For this holy house…’. This is not in the older
rite, since the ‘House’ has not yet been consecrated.

An interesting detail is that for the Liturgy on the day of the
consecration, as well as on the annual Dedication feast, St Symeon notes
that the Cherubic Hymn is ‘Let all mortal flesh keep silent’ \[PG
145:328D\].

The Greek words meaning ‘dedicate’ and ‘dedication’ are not easy to
translate into English, since they also have the connotation of
‘newness’, ‘renewal’. The opening Stichera for Vespers, for example,
make frequent play on the ideas of ‘new’ and ‘old’. David, in Psalm 50,
asks God to ‘renew a right Spirit within me’, rather than ‘dedicate a
right Spirit’. For this reason I have sometimes expanded slightly and
used expressions like ‘dedicate anew’, but without great clumsiness it
is not possible to express both these ideas of ‘dedication’ and renewal’
in every instance. It is important, therefore, to bear in mind that the
‘dedication’ of a ‘new’ Church calls for the inner ‘renewal’, the
‘rededication’ of all those who take part in it.

The booklet from the *Apostoliki Diakonia* divides the rite into six
sections, to which we have added subtitles to explain the symbolism of
the rite. The rite is really the consecration of the Altar, the Church
being sanctified by the presence of the consecrated Altar. Without this,
says St Symeon, a Church building is simply an oratory, or house of
prayer. The anointing of other parts of the building is, in the
Byzantine rite, almost an afterthought and according to the strict
Typikon is done by a Priest, or another Bishop if one is present,
following the consecrating Bishop as he goes round censing the whole
Church towards the end of the whole ceremony.

At the end of Matins we have added a note from the *Large Euchologion*
which supposes that the actual dedication takes place after Matins. The
two long prayers by Patriarch Kallistos, which are to be said during
Lauds in the present rite, are printed quite separately in the
*Euchologion* before the Rite itself. In the Slav books the first of
these forms the concluding prayer of the whole rite, while the second is
not used at all.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
