\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](voiceof.md) \]
\[ [Athanasios of Alexandria](athanasios_of_alexandria.md) \]
\[ [Theodore the Studite](theodore.md) \] \[ Ephrem the Syrian \]

[Sermon in Heptasyllablics](ser-hept.md)  
[Three Short Discourses](3disc.md)  
[55 Beatitudes](55beat.md)  
[To the Monks of Egypt](egypt-int.md)  
[On the Departed Fathers](dead-pat.md)  
[On Abraham and Isaac](AbrIsaac.md)  
[On Joseph](on_joseph.md)  
[On the Transfiguration](on_the_transfiguration.md)  
[On The Passion](PassSer.md)

 

# SAINT EPHREM THE SYRIAN

![](Eph-Syr.gif)

**Icon of Saint Ephrem the Syrian**

# ASCETICAL AND OTHER WRITINGS  
EXTANT ONLY IN GREEK

## INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The ascetic writings in Greek attributed to St Ephrem the Syrian \[†
373\] are some of the basic texts of Orthodox monasticism. The
*Triodion* lays down that they are to be read at Matins each weekday
morning in Lent, after the first two readings from the Psalter. Together
with the *Lausiac History* of Palladios, prescribed to be read after the
third reading of the Psalter and the third Ode of the Canon, the
*Ladder* of St John of Sinai and the *Instructions* of St Theodore the
Studite, they should form the regular diet of non-biblical spiritual
reading for Orthodox Christians.

The large corpus of Greek texts that go under the name of St Ephrem the
Syrian have been greatly neglected by scholars. The only full editions
are those published in the 18th century by Thwaites, in Oxford \[1709\],
and by Assemani, largely based on Thwaites, in Rome \[1743\]. Mercati
began a critical edition in 1915, but only one fascicle of the first
volume ever appeared. In 1988 a corrected reprint, based on the two
eighteenth century editions, together with a translation into Modern
Greek, began to be published in Thessaloniki. It was brought to
completion late in 1998 with the publication of the seventh, and final,
volume.  This final volume contains a number of texts that do appear in
either of the 18th century editions.The whole is extremely useful,
though it is not a critical, but rather a practical, edition.

Some of these texts seem to be translations of Syriac metrical homilies,
but the majority of them are almost certainly original Greek works and
most of these the product of Byzantine coenobitic monasticism. They are
of different dates and by different authors. A number of them are
written in the metre called in Syriac the ‘metre of St Ephrem’, but do
not appear to be translations. Some of them seem to have been known to
St Romanos the Melodist in the sixth century and one large collection of
fifty ‘Exhortations to the Monks of Egypt’ is mentioned by St Photios
the Great \[c.810-c.895\] in his ‘Library’.

The best known of these Greek texts is the prayer of St Ephrem the
Syrian, which is prescribed for use in all the Lenten offices of the
Church and is one of best loved prayers of Orthodox Christians. The
vices there listed are those typical of coenobitic communities, which
leads one to suggest that the prayer is unlikely to be by St Ephrem
himself, though whether its origin is Greek or Syrian is harder to say.
There is one intriguing difference between the Greek and Slavonic texts
of the prayer. Where the Greek has ‘idle curiosity’, *periergia*, the
Slavonic has ‘faint-heartedness’, which in Greek is *akedia*, the
classic monastic sin. Does this go back to a different original, or is
it a reflection of differing national temperaments?

These Greek writings attributed to St Ephrem have never been translated
into English and so I hope on this page to begin to fill a yawning gap
in the spiritual reading of English speaking Orthodox Christians. The
translations are not ‘scholarly’, since no critical edition of the
originals exists, but ‘practical’.

The icon of St Ephrem was painted for me at the Monastery of the Holy
Paraclete, Oropos, Attica in Greece in 1982.

-----

The Introductions, Notes and Translations on these pages are all © by
Archimandrite Ephrem, 1997.

-----

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

