\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](readLent.md) \]
\[ [First Week](first.md) \] \[ [Second Week](second_week.md) \]
\[ [Third Week](third.md) \] \[ [Fourth Week](fourth.md) \]
\[ Fifth Week \] \[ [Sixth Week](sixth_week.md) \]

****

ON MONDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK

## 

AT THE TRITHEKTI

****

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 3.

Because our iniquities have risen up against us, arise, Lord, help us;
\* for you are our Father, and we know no other but you.

Prokeimenon in the 8th Tone. Psalm 83.

Your altars, O Lord of powers, \* my King and my God.

****

Verse:

How beloved are your dwellings, O Lord of powers\!

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**37,33-38 & 38,1-6**\]

Thus says the Lord concerning the king of Assyria: He shall not enter
this city, nor shoot an arrow against it, nor come before it with a
shield, nor cast up a siege ramp against it. But by the way that he
came, by the same he shall return; and he shall not enter this city.
Thus says the Lord: For I will defend this city to save it, for my own
sake and for the sake of my servant David. Then an Angel of the Lord
went out and struck down one hundred and eighty-five thousand in the
camp of the Assyrians. When morning dawned, they were all dead. Then
King Senachereim of Assyria turned and departed, and dwelt in Nineve. As
he was worshipping in the house of his tutelary god Nasarach, his sons
Adramelech and Sarasar struck him down with swords, and escaped into the
land of Armenia. His son Asordan succeeded him. \[

**38,1**\] It came to pass at that time that Ezekias became sick and was
at the point of death. And the prophet Isaias, son of Amos, came to him,
and said to him, ‘Thus says the Lord: Set your house in order, for you
shall die. You will not live.’ Then Ezekias turned his face to the wall,
and prayed to the Lord, saying, ‘Remember, Lord, how I have walked
before you in truth with a true heart, and have done what is pleasing in
your sight’. And Ezekias wept bitterly. Then the word of the Lord came
to Isaias: Go and say to Ezekias, ‘Thus says the Lord, the God of your
father David: I have heard your prayer, and I have seen your tears. See,
I am adding fifteen years to your time. I will deliver you and this city
out of the hand of the king of Assyria, and defend this city.’

Prokeimenon in the 8th Tone. Psalm 84.

Lord, show us your mercy, \* and grant us your salvation.

****

Verse:

You were well pleased with your land, O Lord, you turned away the
captivity of Jacob. ****

AT VESPERS

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 85.

Guide me, Lord, in your way, \* and I shall walk in your truth.

****

Verse:

Incline your ear, O Lord, and hear me.

The Reading is from Genesis.

\[

**13,12-18**\]

Abram settled in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled in a city of the
people of the region and dwelt in Sodom. Now the people of Sodom were
evil, great sinners before God. God said to Abram after Lot had
separated from him, Raise your eyes, and look from the place where you
are now, northward and southward and eastward and seaward; for all the
land that you see I will give to you and to your offspring for ever. I
will make your offspring like the sand of the earth. If anyone can count
the sand of the earth, your offspring will also be counted. Rise up,
walk through the length and the breadth of the land, for I will give it
to you and to your seed for ever. So Abram moved his tent, and came and
settled by the oak of Mambre, which was at Hebron; and there he built an
altar to the Lord.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 86.

The Lord loves the gates of Sion \* more than all the tabernacles of
Jacob.

****

Verse:

His foundations are in the holy mountains.

The Reading is from Proverbs.

\[

**14,27-35 & 15,1-4**\]

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life, it makes one avoid the
snares of death. The glory of a king is a multitude of people; without
people a prince is ruined. One who is long suffering has great
understanding, but one who has a hasty temper is mightily senseless. One
whose spirit is meek is a physician of the heart, but a sensitive heart
makes the bones rot. Those who oppress the poor insult their Maker, but
those who honour him take pity on the needy. The ungodly will be driven
away by their evil-doing, but one who trusts in his own integrity is
righteous. Wisdom takes her rest in the good heart of a man, but it is
not known in the heart of fools. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sins
diminish tribes. An understanding servant has the king’s favour, while
by his good behaviour he removes disgrace. \[

**15,1**\] Anger slays even wise men, but a submissive answer turns away
wrath, while a grievous word stirs up anger. The tongue of the wise
knows what is good, but the mouth of fools declares wickedness. The eyes
of the Lord in every place keep watch on the wicked and the good. A
tongue which heals is a tree of life, and one who watches over it will
be filled with spirit. ****

ON TUESDAY OF THE FIFTH WEEK

## 

AT THE TRITHEKTI

****

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 3.

The God of Jacob is our helper \* and our defender in a day of trouble.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 87.

I am poor \* and in toils since my youth.

****

Verse:

Lord God of my salvation I have cried to you by day.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**40,18-31**\]

Thus says the Lord: To what have you likened the Lord, and to what
likeness have you likened him? Has the craftsman not made an image, or
the goldsmith melted gold, gilded it over and made it a likeness? For
the craftsman chooses wood that will not rot and wisely seeks how he
will set up his image so that it may not be shaken. Will you not know?
Will you not hear? Was it not declared to you from the beginning? Have
you not known the foundations of the earth? The one who hold fast the
circle of the earth and those who dwell on it are like locusts. The one
who set up the heaven like a chamber and stretched it out like a tent to
dwell in. The one who appoints rulers to rule as nothing, who made the
earth as nothing. For they shall not plant, nor shall they sow, nor
shall their root take root into the earth. He blew on them and they
withered, and a squall will take them like sticks. Now therefore to what
have you likened me and I shall be exalted? said the Holy One. Lift up
your eyes to the height and see, who has displayed all these things? He
who brings forth his array by number will call them all by name. From
his great glory and by the might of his strength nothing has escaped
you. For do not say, Jacob, and why have you spoken, Israel: My way has
been concealed from God, and my God has taken away judgement and has
departed? And now, have you not known if you have not heard? The eternal
God, the God who formed the extremities of the earth, will not hunger
nor toil, nor is there any searching of his understanding. He gives
strength to the hungry and grief to those who are not suffering. For the
young will hunger and youths will toil and the chosen will be without
strength. But those who wait on God will renew their strength.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 88.

The heavens will declare your wonders, \* and your truth in the church
of the saints.

****

Verse:

I will sing of your mercies, Lord, to generation and generation. ****

AT VESPERS

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 89.

\[

Most unusually this Prokeimenon consists of the first and last verses of
the psalm.\]

Lord, you have been our refuge \* from generation to generation.

****

Verse:

And let the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us, and direct the
works of our hands.

The Reading is from Genesis.

\[

**15,1-15**\]

And the word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision saying, ‘Fear not,
Abram, I am shielding you. Your reward will be exceedingly great.’ But
Abram said, ‘Master, Lord, what will you give me? I am departing
childless, while the son of Masek my home-born female slave, this
Eliezer of Damascus \<will inherit\>‘. And Abram said, ‘Since you have
given me no seed my home-born slave will inherit from me.’ And the voice
of the Lord came to him immediately, saying, ‘He will not inherit, but
one who will come forth from you, he will inherit from you’. And he led
him outside and said to him, ‘Look up to heaven and count the stars, if
you can count them up’. And he said, ‘So shall your seed be’. And Abram
believed God and it was reckoned to him for righteousness. And he said
to him, ‘I am God who brought you out of the land of the Chaldeans so as
to give you this land as your inheritance.’ But he said, ‘Master Lord,
how will I know that I will inherit it?’ And he said to him, ‘Take me a
three year old heifer and a three year old she-goat and a three year old
ram and a dove and a pigeon.’ He took all these and split them down the
middle and set them opposite one another, but the birds he did not
split. But birds came down on the divided parts and Abram sat \[

The LXX seems to have understood the Hebrew verb to have been *ysb*
rather than *nsb*. In an unpointed text, which is of course what the LXX
translator would have had, there would in this context be no difference
in the spelling of the Hebrew.\] with them. About sunset a trance fell
on Abram, and behold, a great darkness fell on him, and it was said to
Abram, ‘You will surely know that your seed will be a sojourner in a
land not their own, and they will enslave them and ill treat them and
humiliate them for four hundred years. But the nation whom ever they
will be slave to I will judge. But after these things they will come out
here with much baggage. But you will go to your fathers in peace,
nourished in a good old age.’

Prokeimenon in the 5th Tone. Psalm 90.

One who dwells in the help of the Most High, \* will encamp under the
protection of the God of heaven.

****

Verse:

Will say to the Lord: You are my helper and my refuge; my God and I will
trust in him.

The Reading is from Proverbs.

\[

**15,7-19**\]

The lips of the wise are bound by discretion, but the hearts of fools
are not safe. The sacrifices of the ungodly are an abomination to the
Lord, but the prayers of the upright are acceptable with him. An
abomination to the Lord are the ways of the ungodly, but he loves those
who pursue righteousness. The instruction of the innocent is known by
those who pass by, but those who hate reproofs come to their end
disgracefully. Hell and destruction are manifest to the Lord, how then
shall not human hearts be also? An uninstructed person will not love
those who rebuke him, but he will not converse with the wise. When the
heart is glad the face is cheerful, but when it is in sorrows the face
is sad. An upright heart seeks discretion, but the mouth of the
uninstructed will know evils. The eyes of the evil look for evils all
the time, but the good are always still. Better a small portion with
fear of the Lord, than great treasures with no fear. Better
entertainment of vegetables with friendship and grace than a spread of
calves with enmity. An irate person prepares fights, but a long
suffering one calms even a fight that is imminent. A long suffering
person extinguishes quarrels, but an ungodly one rather stirs them up.
The ways of the idle are strewn with thorns, but those of the
hardworking are smoothed.

****

ON WEDNESDAY OF THE 5TH WEEK

## 

AT THE TRITHEKTI

****

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 1.

Be entreated by the sufferings which the Saints endure for you, O Lord;
\* and heal all our pains we beg, O Lover of mankind.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 91.

It is good to give thanks to the Lord, \* and to sing to your name, O
Most High.

****

Verse:

To declare your love in the morning, and your truth each day.  
\[The LXX in fact has ‘in the night’, but in the liturgical use of this
verse ‘night is often replaced by ‘day’ .\]

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**41,4-14**\]

Thus says the Lord: I am first and for what is to come I am. The nations
saw and were afraid, the ends of the earth drew near and came together,
each one judging to help his neighbour and his brother, and he will say,
‘The craftsman has become strong and the bronze smith striking with the
hammer and forging’. Then he will say, ‘It is a good join and they have
fastened them with nails, they will fix them and they will not be
moved’. You are my servant, I have chosen you and I have not abandoned
you. Do not be afraid, for I am with you. Do not go astray, for I am
your God who gives you strength and I have helped you and made you safe
with my just right hand. See, all those who oppose you will be put to
shame and turned back, for they will be as though they did not exist and
all your opponents will perish. You will look for them and not find
those who rage like drunkards against you, for those who make war on you
will be as though they did not exist and they will not be. Because I am
your God who gives might to your right hand and who says to you: Do not
be afraid Jacob, Israel few in number. I have helped you, Israel, I the
God who rescues you.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 92.

The Lord is king, \* he has robed himself in majesty.

****

Verse:

The Lord has robed and girded himself with power.

## 

AT VESPERS

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 93.

The Lord is a God of vengeance, \* the God of vengeance has spoken
boldly.

****

Verse:

Be exalted, you who judge the earth, give the proud their due reward.

The Reading is from Genesis.

\[

**17,1-9**\]

When Abram was ninety nine years old the Lord appeared to him and said,
‘I am your God; be well-pleasing before me and be blameless, and I
will establish my covenant between me and you and I will multiply you
greatly.’ And Abram fell on his face and God spoke to him saying, ‘See,
my covenant is with you, and you will be the father of many nations. And
your name will no longer be called Abram, but your name will be Abraham,
because I have made you the father of many nations. And I will increase
you greatly and I will make nations from you and kings will come forth
from you. And I will set my covenant between you and your seed after you
to all generations for an eternal covenant, for me to be your God and
that of your seed after you. And I will give you and your seed the land
on which you are dwelling, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, and I shall be God for them’. And God said to Abraham, ‘You
are to keep my covenant, you and your seed after to all their
generations.’

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 95.  
\[

For some reason Psalm 94 is omitted from the series of Prokeimena.\]

Sing to the Lord a new song, \* sing to the Lord all the earth.

****

Verse:

Sing to the Lord, bless his name; day after day proclaim his salvation.

The Reading is from Proverbs.

\[

**15,20-34 & 16,3-9**\]  
\[The reading is in fact continuous, but the arrangement of the verses
differs widely between the MT and the LXX at this point.\]

A wise son gives his father joy, but a foolish son sneers at his mother.
The paths of the senseless lack intelligence, but a prudent man walks
straight. Those who do not honour councils postpone thoughts, but
counsel dwells in the hearts of those who take counsel. The wicked will
in no way obey it, nor will he say anything appropriate or for the
common good. The thoughts of the wise are ways of life, that turning
aside he may be saved from Hell. The Lord pulls down the houses of
scorners, but establishes the border of widows. An unjust thought is an
abomination to the Lord, but the sayings of the pure are reverenced. One
who receives bribes destroys himself, but the person who hates to take
bribes will be saved. Sins are purged away by almsgiving and faithful
dealings, \[

The pious baronet notes that this most unprotestant verse is not in the
Hebrew, ‘nor any such doctrine’\! The verse occurs as 16:6 in the Hebrew
in a somewhat different form.\] but by fear of the Lord everyone turns
from evil. The hearts of the righteous meditate faithfulness, but the
mouth of the ungodly gives wicked answers. The ways of just men are
acceptable to the Lord, while through them even enemies become friends.
God goes far away from the ungodly, but hearkens to prayers of the just.
Better a small income with justice than large receipts with injustice.
Let the heart of a man consider what is just, that his steps may be set
right by God. An eye that sees rightly rejoices the heart, while a good
reputation fattens the bones. One who rejects instruction hates himself,
but one who guards reproofs loves his own soul. Fear of God is
instruction and wisdom, and the beginning of glory will answer it. All
the works of the humble are manifest with God, while the ungodly will
perish in an evil day. Everyone who is proud hearted is unclean with
God, and one who strikes hands with hand will not be held guiltless. The
beginning of a good way is to do what is just, it is more acceptable to
the Lord than sacrificing sacrifices. One who seeks the Lord will find
knowledge with justice, while those who seek him rightly will find
peace. All the works of the Lord are done with justice, but the ungodly
is kept for an evil day. ****

And the rest of the Office of the Presanctified.  
In the Refectory we take wine. We sing Compline in our cells.

****

ON THURSDAY OF THE 5TH WEEK

## 

AT THE TRITHEKTI

****

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 8.

Compassionate, long suffering, Almighty Lord, \* send down your mercy on
your people.

Prokeimenon in the 8th Tone. Psalm 96.

The Lord is king, \* let the earth be glad.

****

Verse:

Let all his Angels worship him.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**42,5-16**\]

Thus says the Lord, who made the heaven and fixed it, who established
the earth and the things in it and who gives breath to the people upon
it and spirit to those who tread it. I the Lord God called you in
righteousness and I will take your hand and give you strength and I have
given you as a covenant of a race, for a light of nations to open the
eyes of the blind to lead out those who have been bound and those who
sit on darkness from prison. I am the Lord God, this is my name; I will
not give my glory to another nor my virtues to carved idols. See, the
things from the beginning have come, and new things, which I am
declaring, and which have been shown us \[

The Triodion follows the reading of Q, which is not recorded by Rahlfs.
The other uncials have the correct reading.\] before they are declared.
Sing to the Lord a new hymn you his dominion; glorify his Name from the
extremity of the earth, you who go down to the sea and sail it, you
islands and you who inhabit them. Let the wilderness be glad and its
villages, its hamlets and the inhabitants of Kedar. Those who inhabit
the rock will rejoice, from the peaks of the mountains they will shout;
they will give glory to God, they will declare his virtues to the
islands. The Lord God of powers will come forth and crush war, he will
rouse zeal and cry out against his enemies with strength. I have kept
silent, shall I also keep be silent always and forbear I have endured
like a woman in childbirth, I will amaze and wither at the same time. I
will make mountains and hills and all their grass wither. I will make
rivers into islands and dry up pools. And I will bring the blind by a
way that they did not know, and I will make them tread paths of which
they had no knowledge. I will turn darkness into light for them and
their crooked places into straight. I will do these things and I will
not desert them.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 97.

Sing to the Lord a new song, \* for the Lord has done wondrous things.

****

Verse:

Shout with joy to God all the earth, sing and rejoice and chant.

## 

AT VESPERS

Evening Prokeimenon in the 7th Tone. Psalm 98.

\[

This is one of the traditional Psalms for the Cross, which conveniently
falls on a Friday. Or does this explain the omission of Psalm 94 earlier
in the week? Probably not, since it would in that case have been the
second Prokeimenon for this evening\]

Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, \* for he is holy.

****

Verse:

The Lord is king, let the peoples rage; he is seated on the Cherubim,
let the earth be shaken.

The Reading is from Genesis.

\[

**18,20-33**\]

The Lord said, ‘The cry of Sodom and Gomorra has been increased before
me, and their sins are exceedingly great. Therefore I will go down and
see if they completely correspond to their cry which comes to me, but if
not, that I may know it.’ And the men turned away from there and came to
Sodom. But Abraham was still standing before the Lord. And coming near
Abraham said, ‘Will you destroy the just with the godless and shall the
just be as the godless? If there are fifty just in the city will you
destroy them? Will you not spare the whole place for the sake of fifty
just, if there are in it? By no means should you act in this way, to
slay the just like the ungodly. By no means. You judge the whole earth,
will you not act with judgement?’ The Lord said, ‘If there are fifty
just in the city of Sodom I will spare the whole city and the whole
place for their sake.’ And Abraham answered and said, ‘Now I have begun
to speak to my Lord, I who am but earth and ashes. If there should be
less than fifty just, but forty five, will you destroy the whole city
for the sake of those five?’ And he said, ‘I will not destroy it if I
find there forty five.’ And he continued to speak to him and said, ‘But
if there are found there forty?’ And he said, ‘I will not destroy for
the sake of the forty.’ And he said,’ Will there be anything if I speak?
If thirty are found there?’ And he said, ‘I will not destroy for the
sake of the thirty’. And he said, ‘Since I am able to speak to the Lord;
if there be found there twenty?’ And he said, ‘I will not destroy if I
find twenty there.’ And he said, ‘Will there be anything, Lord, if I
speak yet once more. If ten be found there?’ And he said, ‘I will not
destroy for the sake of ten.’ Then the Lord departed when he had ceased
speaking to Abraham. And Abraham returned to his place.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 99.

Shout with joy to the Lord \* all the earth.

****

Verse:

Serve the Lord with gladness, enter his presence with joy.

The Reading is from Proverbs.

\[

**16,17-33 & 17,1-17**\]

One who accepts instruction will be among good things, while one who
guards reproofs will be made wise. One who guards his own ways will
preserve his own soul, while one who loves his life will spare his
mouth. Pride goes before destruction, folly before a fall. Better one
who is meek spirited with humility than one who shares out spoils with
scorners. One who has understanding in affairs will be a discoverer of
good things, while one who trusts in God is blessed. People call the
wise and understanding worthless, but they who are sweet in word will
hear more. Understanding is a source of life to its possessors, but the
instruction of fools is evil. The heart of the wise will discern things
from his own mouth, while on his lips he will wear knowledge. Good words
are honeycombs, its sweetness a healing of the soul. There are ways that
seem right to a man, their ends however look on the depth of Hell. A man
in labours labours for himself and forces out his own ruin, the perverse
however wears ruin on his own mouth. A foolish man digs evils for
himself, treasures up fire on his own lips. A perverse man spreads evils
and will light a torch of guile with evils and he parts friends. A
lawless man puts friends to the test and leads them by ways that are not
good. One who fixes his eyes thinks on perverse things, while his lips
define all evils. Such a one is a furnace of wickedness. Old age is a
crown to boast of, it is found in ways of righteousness. Better a long
suffering man than a strong one, one who governs his temper than one who
captures a city. Everything comes into the lap of the unjust, everything
that is just from the Lord. \[

**17,1**\] Better a crust with peace than a house full of many good
things and unjust sacrifices with conflict. A wise servant will hold
sway over foolish masters, and will share portions among brothers. As
silver and gold are tested in a furnace so are chosen hearts with the
Lord. The wicked obeys the tongue of transgressors, but the just does
not attend to lying lips. One who laughs at the poor provokes the one
who made him, while one who rejoices at one who is destroyed will not be
guiltless, but one who has pity will find mercy. Children’s children are
a crown for the old, while their fathers are the children’s boast. The
faithful has the whole world of money, but the unfaithful has not a
farthing. Faithful lips will not suit a fool, nor lying lips the
righteous. For those who use it instruction is a reward of graces, while
wherever it turns it will prosper. One who conceals injustices seeks
friendship; but one who hates to conceal them will separates friends and
kinsfolk. A threat crushes the heart of the prudent, but a fool when
flogged feels nothing. Every wicked person stirs up strife, but the Lord
will send out against him a merciless messenger \[Or ‘angel’\]. Care
will befall a man of sense, but fools will discuss evil things. Whoever
rewards evils for good things, evils will not be removed from his house.
A rule of justice gives authority to words, but conflict and strife
precede want. One who judges the unjust to be just, but the just to be
unjust is unclean and abominable to God. Why does the fool have money?
For the senseless is unable to purchase wisdom. One who makes his house
high is seeking ruin, while one who neglects to learn will fall into
evils. At every moment have a friend, and let brothers be useful in
times of need. ****

And the rest of the Office of the Liturgy of the Presanctified, at which
we take communion of the holy mysteries of Christ.

Note that if the Annunciation falls on this day the Office of the Great
Canon is anticipated to Tuesday, that is Monday evening, but the Feast
is not transferred.

****

ON FRIDAY OF THE 5TH WEEK

## 

AT THE TRITHEKTI

****

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 5.

You are greatly to be praised Christ our God, who shake the earth to
make those who dwell in it turn back and be saved, and you establish it
again through your own loving kindness and ineffable compassion. \* At
the prayers of the Mother of God have mercy on us.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 100.

I will sing to you, O Lord, \* of mercy and judgement.

****

Verse:

I will chant and be wise on a blameless way.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**45,11-17**\]

Thus says the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel who made the things that
are to come: Ask me about my sons and about my daughters, and about the
works of my hands command me. I made the earth and mankind upon it; I
with my hand established the heaven, I gave commandment to all the
stars. I raised him up with righteousness to be king, and all his ways
are upright. He will build my city and turn back the captivity of my
people not with ransoms nor with gifts, says the Lord Sabaoth. Thus says
the Lord: Egypt has toiled and the merchandise of the Ethiopians, and
the Sabeans, lofty men, will pass over to you and will do reverence to
you and make their prayer by you; because God is in you and their is no
God beside you. For you are God and we did not know, the God of Israel,
the Saviour. All those who oppose him will be put to shame and will walk
in shame. Keep a feast of dedication to me you islands. Israel is being
saved by the Lord with an eternal salvation; they will not be put to
shame nor will they be turned back again for ever, says the Lord
Almighty.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 101.

Lord, hearken to my prayer, \* and let my cry come to you.

******

Verse:

Do not turn your face from me; in the day I am afflicted incline your
ear to me; in the day when I call upon you hearken to me speedily.

## 

AT VESPERS

Evening Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 102.

The Lord is compassionate and merciful, \* long suffering and of great
mercy.

****

Verse:

Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy
name.

The Reading is from Genesis.

\[

**22,1-18**\]

It came to pass after these things that God tested Abraham and said to
him, ‘Abraham, Abraham.’ He said, ‘Here I am.’ And he said, ‘Take your
son, your beloved, whom you love, Isaac, and go to the high land and
offer him there as a whole burnt offering on one of the mountains which
I will tell you.’ But Abraham arose in the morning and saddled his ass.
He took with him two lads and Isaac his son and having split wood for a
whole burnt offering he arose and went and came to the place of which
God had spoken to him on the third day. And Abraham lifted up his eyes
and saw the place from afar. And Abraham said to his lads, ‘Sit here
with the ass while I and the lad will go over there and when we have
worshipped we will return to you.’ Abraham took the wood for the whole
burnt offering and put it on Isaac his son, while he took in his hands
both the fire and the knife, and they went the two of them together.
Isaac said to his father Abraham, ‘Father.’ He said, ‘What is it,
child?’ He said, ‘See, here are fire and wood. Where is the sheep for
the whole burnt offering?’ Abraham said, ‘God will see for himself to a
sheep for the whole burnt offering, child.’ They went both of them
together and came to the place of which God had told him. And there
Abraham built the altar and put the wood on it and he bound his son
Isaac and put him on the altar on top of the wood. And Abraham stretched
out his hand to take the knife to slay his son. And the Angel of the
Lord called him from heaven and said, ‘Abraham, Abraham.’ But he said,
‘Here I am.’ And he said, ‘Do not lay your hand on the child nor do
anything to him, for now I know that you fear God and you have not
spared your beloved son for my sake.’ And raising his eyes Abraham saw
and see, a ram caught in a Sabek plant by the horns. And Abraham went
and took the ram and offered it as a whole burnt offering instead of his
son Isaac. And Abraham called the name of the place The Lord saw, so
that they say today, on the mountain the Lord appeared. And the Angel of
the Lord called Abraham a second time from heaven saying, ‘By myself I
have sworn, says the Lord, because you have done this thing and have not
spared your beloved son for my sake, multiplying I will multiply you
your seed like all the stars of heaven and like the sand which is beside
the edge of the sea; and your seed will inherit the cities of their
opponents. And in your seed all the nations of the earth will be
blessed, in return for your obeying my voice.’

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 103.

How magnificent are your works, O Lord, \* with wisdom you have made
them all.

******

Verse:

Bless the Lord, O my soul. Lord my God, you are greatly magnified, you
have clothed yourself with praise and majesty.

The Reading is from Proverbs.

\[

**17,17b-28 & 18,1-5**\]

Let brothers be useful in time of need, for this they are born. A
foolish man claps and rejoices at himself, like one who stands surety
standing surety for his own friends. One who loves sin rejoices at
conflicts, while the hard-hearted does not meet with the good. A man of
changing tongue will fall into evils, while a foolish heart is a pain
for the one who possesses it. A father is not made glad by a son without
instruction, but a prudent son makes his mother glad. A glad heart
creates good health, but the bones of a sorrowful man dry up. The ways
of one who takes gifts in his bosom unjustly do not prosper, while the
ungodly perverts ways of righteousness. The face of a wise man is
intelligent, but the eyes of the fool go to the extremities of the
earth. A foolish son is anger for his father and a grief for her who
gave him birth. To punish a just man is not good, nor is it holy to plot
against just princes. One who forbears to utter a harsh word is
discreet, while a long suffering man is discreet. Wisdom will be imputed
to a fool who asks for wisdom, while one who holds his peace will seem
to be prudent. \[

**18,1**\] A man who wishes to be parted from friends seeks excuses, but
at every moment he will be subject to reproach. One who lacks sense has
no need of wisdom, rather he is led by folly. Whenever the ungodly comes
into a depth of evils he despises them, but dishonour and reproach come
upon him. A word in a man’s heart is deep water, while a river and a
source of life well up. It is not good to marvel at the face of the
ungodly, nor holy to pervert what is just in giving judgement. ****

And the rest of the Office of the Presanctified. At Compline we sing the
Canon for the dead of the prevailing Tone and likewise that of the Saint
of the day in the Menaion.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

