\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lenten_offices.md) \]
\[ [Lenten Matins](lenten_matins.md) \]
\[ [First Hour](first_hour.md) \] \[ [Trithekti](trithekti.md) \]
\[ [Ninth Hour and Typika](ninth_hour_and_typika.md) \]
\[ [Lenten Vespers 1](lenten_vespers_1.md) \]
\[ [Lenten Vespers 2](lenten_vespers_2.md) \] \[ Great Compline \]

# GREAT COMPLINE

****

The office of Compline is not sung in the Church in the Monastery of the
Lavra, but one reads it in one’s cell. In the Koinovia of Palestine,
however, Compline is sung as follows.

About the 12th hour of the day the Lamplighter enters and having made a
metania to the Superior he strikes the simandron 12 times and we
assemble in the Church. Each makes the prescribed metanias and we sit
for a little until all, or most, are assembled. The Priest rises from
his seat and having made the customary metania to the Abbot he gives the
blessing. After the blessing by the Priest, the Superior, or the Reader,
continues

Amen. Glory to you, our God, glory to you.

Heavenly King, Paraclete, Spirit of truth, present everywhere, filling
all things, Treasury of blessings and Giver of life, come and dwell in
us, cleanse us from every stain, and, O Good One, save our souls.

****

Reader:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three
times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen.

Lord, have mercy. (

**x12**). Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit,
both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

3 Metanias. Then the Psalms.

If it is the first week of Great Lent we begin at once with Psalm 69 and
then the Great Canon, which we sing in four sections Irmos by Irmos, so
as to finish on Thursday.

After the 6th Ode Kathismata of Compunction in Tone 6:  

Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy on us; for we sinners, lacking all
defence, offer you, as our Master, this supplication: have mercy on us.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Lord, have mercy on us, for in you we have put our trust. Do not be very
angry with us, nor remember our iniquities. But look on us now, as you
are compassionate, and rescue us from our enemies. For you are our God,
and we are your people; we are all the work of your hands, and we have
called on your name.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Open the gate of compassion to us, blessed Mother of God; hoping in you,
may we not fail. Through you may we be delivered from adversities, for
you are the salvation of the Christian race.

**After the Canon is finished we continue with Psalm 4.** \[**After the
6th Ode the Kontakion of the Great Canon**\] **Otherwise we begin as
follows:**

Psalm 4  

When I called you heard me, God of my justice, when I was in trouble you
set me at large; have pity on me and hear my prayer. Sons of men, how
long will you be heavy-hearted? Why do you love vanity and seek lying?
Know too that the Lord has made his Holy One wonderful. The Lord will
hear me when I cry to him. Be angry, and do not sin; for what you say in
your hearts, feel compunction on your beds. Sacrifice a sacrifice of
justice and hope in the Lord. Many say, ‘Who will show us good things?’
The light of your countenance has been marked upon us, O Lord. You have
given joy to my heart, from the fruit of their corn, wine and oil they
have been filled. I shall lie down in peace and sleep at once; because
you, Lord, alone have made me dwell in hope. ****

Psalm 6  

Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger, nor chastise me in your wrath.
Have mercy on me, Lord, for I am weak; heal me for my bones have been
troubled, and my soul exceedingly troubled; but you, Lord, how long?
Turn back, O Lord, deliver my soul; save me for your mercy’s sake. For
in death no one remembers you; and in Hell who will confess you? I have
toiled in my groaning, every night I shall wash my bed and drench my
couch with my tears. My eye has been troubled through anger, I have
grown old among all my foes. Depart from me all you who work iniquity,
for the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord has heard my
supplication, the Lord has accepted my prayer. Let all my enemies be
ashamed and greatly troubled, let them be turned back and speedily be
utterly ashamed. ****

Psalm 12  

How long, O Lord, will you finally forget me? How long will you turn
your face from me? How long shall I lay plans in my soul, griefs in my
heart day and night? How long will my foe be exalted against me? Look on
me, hear me, Lord my God. Enlighten my eyes lest I sleep in death. Let
my enemy never say, ‘I have prevailed against him’. Those who trouble me
will rejoice if I slip. But I have hoped in your mercy. My heart will be
glad in your salvation; I shall sing to the Lord my benefactor and chant
to the name of the Lord most high. ****

And again:

Look on me, hear me, O Lord my God. Enlighten my eyes lest I sleep in
death. Let my enemy never say, ‘I have prevailed against him’.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**). ****

Three Metanias.

Lord, have mercy (**x3**). Glory. Both now. ****

Psalm 24

  
To you, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul. My God, I have trusted in you,
do not let me be shamed for ever. Do not let my foes laugh at me; for
all who wait patiently for you will not be shamed; let those who
transgress without cause be shamed. O Lord, let me know your ways, and
teach me your paths. Guide me into your truth and teach me, for you are
God my Saviour, and I have waited patiently on you all the day. Remember
your pity, Lord, and your mercies, for they are eternal. Do not remember
the sins and follies of my youth, according to your mercy remember me,
on account of your goodness, O Lord. The Lord is good and upright,
therefore he will give laws to those who sin in the way. He will guide
the meek with judgement, he will teach the meek his ways. All the Lord’s
ways are mercy and truth, for those who seek his covenant and his
testimonies. For your name’s sake, O Lord, be merciful to my sin, for it
is great. Who is a man who fears the Lord? He will give him laws in the
way which he has chosen. His soul will dwell among good things and his
seed will inherit the earth. The Lord is the strength of those who fear
him, and his covenant will show them this. My eyes are ever toward the
Lord, for he will draw my feet out of the snare. Look on me and have
mercy on me; for I am alone and poor. The afflictions of my heart have
been multiplied; bring me out of my troubles. See my humiliation and my
toil, and forgive all my sins. See my foes, for they have been
multiplied, and have hated me with an unjust hatred. Guard my soul and
deliver me; let me not be shamed, for I have hoped in you. The innocent
and upright have joined themselves to me, because I have waited
patiently for you, O Lord. O God, redeem Israel from all his
afflictions. ****

Psalm 30  

In you, O Lord, I have hoped, let me not be put to shame for ever, in
your justice deliver me, and rescue me. Incline your ear to me, make
haste to rescue me. Be for me a God who is my defender, and a place of
refuge to save me. For you are my strength and my refuge, and for your
name’s sake you will guide me and nourish me. You will bring me out of
this snare which they have hidden for me, for you are my defender, O
Lord. Into your hands I will entrust my spirit. You have redeemed me,
Lord God of truth. You have hated those who preserve vanities to no
purpose. But I have hoped in the Lord. I will rejoice and be glad in
your mercy. For you have seen my humiliation, saved my soul from
constraints. You have not shut me into the hands of enemies; you have
set my feet on a broad place. Have mercy on me, Lord, for I am
afflicted; my eye is troubled with anger, my soul and my belly. For my
life is spent with grief, and my years with groanings. My strength has
grown weak through poverty, and my bones have been troubled. I have
become a reproach to all my foes, and even more so to my neighbours; an
object of fear to my acquaintances. Those who saw me fled from me. I
have been forgotten from the heart like a corpse. I have become like a
broken vessel, for I have heard the mockery of many who dwell round
about. When they gathered together against me, they laid plans to take
my soul. But I have hoped in you, O Lord; you are my God; my lot is in
your hands. Deliver me from the hands of my foes, and from those who
persecute me. Make your face shine on your servant, save me in your
mercy. O Lord, may I not be put to shame, for I have called upon you.
Let the impious be put to shame; let them be brought down to Hell. Let
the deceitful lips be speechless, which speak iniquity against the just,
with arrogance and contempt. How great is the multitude of your
goodness, O Lord, which you have hidden for those who fear you; which
you have wrought for those who hope in you, in the sight of the children
of men. You will hide them in the secrecy of your countenance, from the
tumult of men. You will shelter them in a tabernacle from the
contradiction of tongues. Blessed is the Lord, for he has made his mercy
in a fortified city. But I said in my ecstasy, ‘I am cast away from the
presence of your eyes’. Therefore you have heard the voice of my prayer,
when I called to you. Love the Lord all you his saints, for the Lord
seeks truth, and will repay those who act with arrogance. Take courage,
and let your heart be strong, all you who hope in the Lord. ****

Psalm 90  

One who dwells in the help of the Most High will live under the
protection of the of the God of heaven; will say to the Lord, ‘You are
my protector and my refuge, my God, and I shall hope in him’. For he
will deliver you from the snare of hunters, and from the word which
troubles. He will overshadow you with his wings, and beneath his
feathers you will hope; his truth will encircle you with a shield. You
will not be afraid of terror by night, of the arrow that flies by day.
Of the thing that prowls in the darkness, of mishap and the noonday
devil. A thousand may fall at your side, and ten thousand at your right,
but it will not come near you. But with your eyes you will observe, and
see the reward of sinners. For you, Lord, are my hope, you have made the
Most High your refuge. Evils will not approach you, nor a scourge draw
near your dwelling. Because he has given orders to his Angels about you,
to guard you in all your ways. They will bear you on their hands, lest
you dash your foot against a stone. You will walk on asp and basilisk,
and trample down lion and dragon. ‘Because he hoped in me, I shall
deliver him; I shall shelter him, because he knew my name. He will cry
to me, and I shall hear him, I am with him in trouble; I shall rescue
him and glorify him. I shall fill him with length of days, and show him
my salvation’.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

***x3***). ****

Three Metanias.

Lord, have mercy (***x3***). Glory. Both now. ****

Then the following Verses, read without singing, except in Great Lent,
when they are sung by both Choirs slowly and loudly. The first Choir
begins as follows:

God is with us, understand you nations, and submit.

For God is with us.

To the ends of the earth give ear.

For God is with us.

Submit, you mighty ones.

For God is with us.

If again you become strong, you will also submit again.

For God is with us.

And whatever you plan, the Lord will scatter it.

For God is with us.

And whatever word you speak, it will not remain among you.

For God is with us.

Fear of you we shall not fear, nor shall we be troubled.

For God is with us.

The Lord our God, let us sanctify him, and he will be our fear.

For God is with us.

And if I should trust in him, he will be sanctification for me.

For God is with us.

And I will trust in him, and I will be saved through him.

For God is with us.

Here am I and the children whom God has given me.

For God is with us.

The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light.

For God is with us.

We who dwell in the land and the shadow of death, a light will shine on
us.

For God is with us.

For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given.

For God is with us.

Whose government was upon his shoulder.

For God is with us.

And of his peace there is no bound.

For God is with us.

And his name shall be called, Angel of great counsel.

For God is with us.

Wonderful Counsellor.

For God is with us.

Mighty God, Ruler, Prince of peace.

For God is with us.

Father of the age to come.

For God is with us.

Glory. For God is with us.

Both now. For God is with us.

****

Then the two Choirs together:

God is with us, understand you nations, and submit: For God is with us.

****

And at once the following Troparia:

As I come to the end of the day, I thank you, Lord, and I ask that the
evening and the night may be without sin. Grant me this, O Saviour, and
save me.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.

As I reach the end of the day, I glorify you, Master, and I ask that the
evening and the night may be without stumbling. Grant me this, O
Saviour, and save me.

Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

As I pass to the end of the day, I praise you, Holy One, and I ask that
the evening and the night may be without assault. Grant me this, O
Saviour, and save me.

****

Then the two Choirs together sing the following:

The bodiless nature, the Cherubim, glorifies you with never silent
hymns.  
The six-winged living creatures, the Seraphim, exalt you with unceasing
voices.  
The whole army of the Angels, praises you with thrice-holy songs.  
For before all you are the Father, the One Who Is, and you have your Son
likewise without beginning.  
And as you bear the Spirit of life, equal in honour, you show that the
Trinity is undivided.  
All-holy Virgin, Mother of God, eye-witnesses and servants of the
Word,  
All choirs of Prophets and Martyrs, as you have immortal life,  
Intercede fervently for us all, for we are all in troubles.  
That delivered from the error of evil, we may cry aloud the Angels’
song.  
Holy, Holy, Holy, Thrice-holy Lord, have mercy and save us. Amen.

****

And at once in a low voice:

I believe in one God, Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all
things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
from the Father before all ages. Light from Light, true God from true
God, begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father; through him all
things were made; for our sake and for our salvation came down from
heaven, and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and
became man; he was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, and
suffered and was buried; he rose again on the third day, in accordance
with the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven and is seated at the right
hand of the Father; he is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead; and his kingdom will have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life, who proceeds from
the Father, who together with Father and Son is worshipped and together
glorified; who spoke through the Prophets. In one, Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church; I confess one Baptism for the forgiveness of sins. I
await the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to come.
Amen.

****

Then the following Verses, of which the first is sung three times and
the rest twice, except for the last, which is sung once only. The second
Choir begins:

All-holy Lady, Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.  
All-holy Lady, Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.  
All-holy Lady, Mother of God, intercede for us sinners.

All you heavenly Powers of Angels and Archangels, intercede for us
sinners.  
All you heavenly Powers of Angels and Archangels, intercede for us
sinners.

Holy John, Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist of our Lord Jesus Christ,
intercede for us sinners.  
Holy John, Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist of our Lord Jesus Christ,
intercede for us sinners.

Holy, glorious Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, and All you Saints,
intercede for us sinners.  
Holy, glorious Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, and All you Saints,
intercede for us sinners.

Our Venerable, God-bearing Fathers, Shepherds and Teachers of the whole
world, intercede for us sinners.  
Our Venerable, God-bearing Fathers, Shepherds and Teachers of the whole
world, intercede for us sinners.

Unconquerable, indestructible and divine power of the precious and
life-giving Cross, do not abandon us sinners.  
Unconquerable, indestructible and divine power of the precious and
life-giving Cross, do not abandon us sinners.

O God, cleanse us sinners.  
O God, cleanse us sinners.

And have mercy on us.

****

Then:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three
times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

Reader: Amen.

****

Then the following Troparia. But if it is a Feast we say that of the
Feast.

Tone 2.

Enlighten my eyes, Christ God, that I may never sleep in death. Let my
enemy never say, ‘I have prevailed against him.’

Glory.

Be the Helper of my soul, O God, for I walk in the midst of many snares.
Deliver me from them and save me, for you are good and love mankind.

Both now.

Because we have no boldness because of our many sins, entreat the One
born of you, Virgin Mother of God; for a Mother’s plea has great force
for the kindness of the Master. Do not despise the supplications of
sinners, O all-holy, for he is merciful, and able to save, he who
accepted to suffer for us.

****

There are other Troparia which are sung day by day in Tone 8, that is to
say on Tuesday and Thursday. These are:

Lord who fashioned me, you know well that my invisible enemies do not
sleep and you know the weakness of my miserable flesh, and so I will
entrust my spirit into your hands. Shelter me with the wings of your
goodness, that I may not sleep unto death. Enlighten the eyes of my mind
with the delight of your divine words, and rouse me at the proper time
to give you glory, are you are alone are good and love mankind.

****

Verse:

Look on me and hearken to me, Lord my God.

How fearful is your judgement, Lord, when the Angels stand round,
mortals are brought in, the books are opened, deeds are examined,
thoughts are tried. What judgement will there be for me, who was
conceived in sins? Who will give light to my darkness, if you, Lord, do
not have mercy on me, as you love mankind?

Glory.

Give me tears, O God, as you once did to the sinful woman, and count me
worthy to water your feet which have freed me from the way of error, and
to bring as sweet-scented myrrh a pure life, fashioned by repentance,
that I too may hear your longed for voice: Your faith has saved you, go
in peace.

Both now.

Having you, Mother of God, as the hope which cannot be put to shame, I
shall be saved. Having your protection, O All-pure, I shall not be
afraid. Armed with your protection alone as my breastplate, I shall
pursue my foes and wound them. And as I entreat your all-powerful help,
I cry out: Sovereign Lady, save me by your prayers, and raise me from
gloomy sleep to sing the praise of your glory, by the power of the Son
of God who was incarnate from you.

Lord, have mercy (

**x40**). Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word. truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

Through the prayers. ****

Then the following:

Prayer of Saint Basil the Great

Lord, Lord, who deliver us from the arrow that flies by day, deliver us
also from every deed that walks in darkness. Accept the lifting up of
our hands as an evening sacrifice. Grant that we may also pass through
the stadium of night without blame, untried by evils, and deliver us
from every trouble and from the fear that comes to us from the devil.
Grant our souls compunction, our thoughts care concerning the
examination in your dread and just judgement. Nail down our flesh from
fear of you, and deaden our members upon earth, that in the calm of
sleep, we may be made bright in the contemplation of your judgements.
Take from us every unseemly imagination and harmful desire. Raise us up
at the hour of prayer, strengthened in the faith and advancing in your
commandments; through the good-pleasure and goodness of your
only-begotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your
all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and always and to the ages of
ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

Three Metanias.

Psalm 50  

Have mercy on me O God, in your great mercy. In accordance with the
multitude of your compassion blot out my offence. Wash me thoroughly
from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I acknowledge my
wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. Against you only I have sinned
and done what is evil in your sight, that you may be justified in your
words, and win when you are judged. For see, in wickedness I was
conceived, and in sin my mother bore me. For see, you have loved truth:
you have shown me the hidden and secret things of your wisdom. You will
sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be cleansed; you will wash me, and I
shall be made whiter than snow. You will make me hear of joy and
gladness; the bones which have been humbled will rejoice. Turn away your
face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities. Create a clean heart
in me, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Do not cast me out
from your presence, and do not take your Holy Spirit from me. Give me
back the joy of your salvation, and establish me with a sovereign
Spirit. I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will turn to
you again. O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from bloodshed,
and my tongue will rejoice at your justice. Lord, you will open my lips:
and my mouth will declare your praise. For if you had wanted a
sacrifice, I would have given it; you will not take pleasure in burnt
offerings. A sacrifice to God is a broken spirit; a broken and a humbled
heart God will not despise. Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good
pleasure; and let the walls of Jerusalem be rebuilt. Then you will be
well pleased with a sacrifice of justice, oblation and whole burnt
offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar. ****

Psalm 101  

Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come to you. Do not turn your face
from me In the day I am in tribulation incline your ear to me. In the
day I call upon you, be swift to hear me. For my days have vanished like
smoke, and my bones have been burnt up like brushwood. I have been
smitten like grass, and my heart has been dried up, so that I have
forgotten to eat my bread. My bones have stuck to my flesh, from the
sound of my groaning. I have become like a desert pelican; like an owl
on a building. I have kept vigil, and become like a sparrow, alone upon
a house-top. All day my enemies have reviled me, and those that praised
me have sworn an oath against me. I have eaten ashes as my bread, and
mixed my drink with weeping. From the presence of your wrath and your
anger, for having lifted me up you have cast me down. My days have
declined like a shadow, and I have been dried up like grass. But you,
Lord, abide for ever, and your memorial to generation and generation.
You will arise and take pity on Sion, for it is time to take pity on
her, for the time has come. For your servants have been well-pleased
with her stones and they will take pity on her dust. And the nations
will fear your name, Lord, and all the kings of the earth your glory.
For the Lord will build up Sion, and appear in his glory. He has looked
on the prayer of the humble, and has not despised their supplication.
Let this be written for another generation, and a people that is being
created will praise the Lord. For the Lord has leaned down from his holy
height, he has looked from heaven upon the earth. To hear the groaning
of those in fetters, to free the children of the slain. To announce the
name of the Lord in Sion, and his praise in Jerusalem. When peoples are
gathered together, and kings to serve the Lord. He answered him in the
way of his strength. Tell me the fewness of my days. Do not lead me away
half way through my days. Your years are for generations of generations.
At the beginning it was you, Lord, who laid the foundations of the
earth, and the heavens are the works of your hands. They will be perish,
but you endure; they will all grow old as a garment. And you will roll
them up like a cloak, and they will be changed; but you are the same,
and your years will not fail. Your servants’ children will have their
dwelling: and their seed will be guided for ever. ****

Prayer of Manasses, King of Judea.  

Lord Almighty, the God of our Fathers, of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and
of their just seed; who made the heaven and the earth with all their
array; who shackled the sea by the word of your command; who shut up the
deep and sealed it with your dread and glorious name; before whom all
things shudder and tremble in the presence of your power; for the
majesty of your glory cannot be borne, and the wrath of threat to
sinners is irresistible, and the mercy of your promise is measureless
and unsearchable. For you are the Lord most high, compassionate,
long-suffering and full of mercy, and you repent over the evils of
mankind. You, Lord, according to the multitude of your goodness, have
appointed repentance and forgiveness to those who have sinned against
you, and in the multitude of your pities, you have decreed repentance
unto salvation for sinners. You therefore, Lord God of Powers, did not
appoint repentance for the just, for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who did
not sin against you, but you have appointed repentance for me a sinner,
because I have sinned above number of the sand of the sea. My iniquities
have been multiplied, Lord, my iniquities have been multiplied, and I am
not worthy to raise my eyes, and to see the height of heaven, because of
the multitude of my unjust deeds. I am bowed down by a heavy iron
fetter, so that I cannot lift my head and there is no respite for me;
because I have provoked your wrath and done what is evil in your sight,
not doing your will nor keeping your commands. And now I bow the knee of
my heart, praying for the goodness which is from you: I have sinned,
Lord, I have sinned, and I recognise my iniquities; but I ask with
supplication: Forgive me, Lord, forgive me, and do not destroy me with
my iniquities, do not be wrath for ever, do not lay up evils for me, nor
condemn me to the lowest parts of the earth: for you are God, the God of
the penitent, and in me you will show all your goodness; for you will
save me who am unworthy according to your great mercy, and I will praise
you continually all the days of my life. For all the power of heaven
praises you, and yours is the glory to the ages of ages. Amen.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen. ****

And the following Troparia. Tone 6

Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy on us; for we sinners, lacking all
defence, offer you, as our Master, this supplication: have mercy on us.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Lord, have mercy on us, for in you we have put our trust. Do not be very
angry with us, nor remember our iniquities. But look on us now, as you
are compassionate, and rescue us from our enemies. For you are our God,
and we are your people; we are all the work of your hands, and we have
called on your name.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Open the gate of compassion to us, blessed Mother of God; hoping in you,
may we not fail. Through you may we be delivered from adversities, for
you are the salvation of the Christian race.

Lord, have mercy (

**x40**), Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word. Truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

Through the prayers… ****

A Prayer of Saint Mardarios

God and Master, Father almighty, Lord, only begotten Son, Jesus Christ
and Holy Spirit, one godhead, one power, have mercy on me a sinner; and
by the judgements which you know, save me your unworthy servant; for you
are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

Three Metanias.

Psalm 69  

O God, come to my help; Lord, hasten to help me. Let those who seek my
soul be shamed and confounded. Let those who wish me evil be turned back
and put to shame. Let those who say to me, ‘Fine, fine\!’ be turned back
immediately, ashamed. Let all who seek you, O God, be glad and rejoice
in you. Let all who love your salvation ever say, ‘The Lord be
magnified.’ But I am poor and needy; help me, O God. You are my helper
and my deliverer; Lord, do not delay. ****

Psalm 142  

Lord, hear my prayer; in your truth give ear to my supplication, and in
your justice hear me. Do not enter into judgement with your servant, for
in your sight no one living can be justified. For the enemy pursued my
soul; humbled my life to the ground; made me dwell in darkness, like
those for ever dead. My spirit in me grew weary, and my heart was
troubled within me. I remembered days of old; I meditated on all your
works. I made the works of your hands my meditation. I stretched out my
hands towards you; my soul thirsted for you like a waterless land. Hear
me swiftly, O Lord; my spirit has failed. Do not turn your face from me,
or I shall be like those who go down to the Pit. Make me hear of your
mercy in the morning, for I have hoped in you. Make known to me the way
in which I should walk, for to you I have lifted up my soul. Deliver me
from my enemies, Lord; I have run to you for shelter. Teach me to do
your will, for you are my God. Your good Spirit will guide me in an
upright land. For your name’s sake, O Lord, you will give me life. In
your justice you will bring my soul out of trouble; in your mercy slay
my enemies, and destroy all those who afflict my soul, for I am your
servant. ****

The Doxology  

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men. We
praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we give you
thanks for your great glory. Lord, King, God of heaven, Father almighty:
Lord, only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ and Holy Spirit. Lord God, Lamb of
God, Son of the Father, who take away the sin of the world, have mercy
on us; you take away the sins of the world. Receive our prayer, you who
sit on the right hand of the Father, and have mercy on us. For you alone
are holy, you alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the
Father. Amen.

Every evening I will bless you, and praise your name for ever and to the
ages of ages. Lord, you have been our refuge from generation to
generation. I said, Lord, have mercy on me, heal my soul, for I have
sinned against you. Lord, I have run to you for refuge; teach me to do
your will for you are my God. For with you is the source of life, and in
your light we shall see light. Continue your mercy toward those who know
you.

Grant, Lord, this night to keep us without sin. Blessed are you, Lord,
the God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is your name for ever
more. Amen. May your mercy, Lord, be upon us, as we have trusted in you.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes. Blessed are you, Master,
make me understand your statutes. Blessed are you, Holy One, enlighten
me with your statutes. Lord, your mercy is for ever. Do not scorn the
work of your hands. To you praise is due, to you song is due, to you
glory is due, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. Amen.

****

Then we say the Canon of the day, or that of the Mother of God from the
Theotokarion.

After the completion of the Troparia of the Canon:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader

*:* Amen. ****

And the following Troparion with its verses:

Tone 6.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

****

Verse:

Praise God in his Saints; praise him in the firmament of his power.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

****

Verse:

Praise him for his mighty acts; praise him according to the greatness of
his majesty.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

****

Verse:

Praise him with the sound of the trumpet; praise him with lute and harp.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

****

Verse:

Praise him with timbrel and dance; praise him with strings and pipe.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

> 

****

Verse:

Praise him with tuneful cymbals; praise him with loud cymbals. Let
everything that has breath praise the Lord.

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

****

The first Choir:

Praise God in his Saints. ****

The second Choir:

Praise him in the firmament of his power. ****

And again the two Choirs together:

Lord of powers be with us; for we have no help but you in troubles. Lord
of powers have mercy on us.

Glory.

Lord, if we did not have your Saints as intercessors, and your goodness
compassionate towards us, how could we dare to hymn you, Saviour, whom
the Angels ceaselessly hymn: You who know the heart, spare our souls.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Many are the multitudes of my offences, Mother of God: to you have I
fled, asking salvation. Look upon my sick soul, and implore your Son and
our God that I be given forgiveness of the dreadful deeds I have done, O
only blessed one.

****

Another.

All-holy Mother of God, throughout my life do not abandon me; do not
entrust me to human protection; but help me yourself and have mercy on
me.

****

Another.

All my hope I place in you, O Mother of God, guard me under your
protection.

****

Then:

Lord, have mercy (**x40**).

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the good things to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word. Truly the Mother of God, we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

** May God take pity on us and bless us, and shed the light of his
countenance on us and have mercy on us. ****

And we make the three great metanias, saying to ourselves at each a line
of the Prayer of St Ephrem:

Lord and Master of my life, do not give me a spirit of sloth, idle
curiosity, love of power and useless chatter. (

**Prostration**)

Rather accord to me, your servant, a spirit of sobriety, humility,
patience and love. (

**Prostration**)

Yes, Lord and King, grant me to see my own faults and not to condemn my
brother; for you are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen. (

**Prostration**) ****

Then the 12 small metanias and again a great metania and the last line
of the Prayer. Then the Trisagion etc. and after it

Lord, have mercy (

**x12**) And save and help us, All-holy Virgin. ****

Prayer to the Most Holy Mother of God

  
**by Paul, monk of the Monastery of Evergetis.**

Spotless, undefiled, incorrupt, immaculate, pure Virgin, Bride of God
and Lady, who by your marvellous conceiving united God the Word with
mankind and joined our rejected human nature to the heavenly realm; the
only hope of the hopeless, help of the attacked, ready assistance of
those who flee to you, and refuge of all Christians; do not turn in
loathing from me, an accursed sinner, who have made myself utterly
worthless through shameful thoughts and words and deeds, and through the
sloth of the pleasures of life have become a slave to my own will. But
as Mother of the God who loves mankind have compassion on me, a sinner
and a prodigal, in your love for mankind, and accept the prayer I offer
you from polluted lips. And using your Mother’s boldness, implore your
Son, our Master and Lord, that he open to me also the compassionate
heart of his goodness, and disregarding my countless offences turn me
back to repentance, and make me a tried worker of his commandments. And,
as you are full of mercy, compassion and loving-kindness, be ever near
me: in this present life a fervent helper and protector, shielding me
from the enemy’s assaults and guiding me to salvation, and at the moment
of my departure watching over my wretched soul and driving far from her
the dark forms of evil demons; but on the dread day of judgement
delivering me from eternal punishment and making me heir to the
ineffable glory of your Son and our God. All this may I obtain, my Lady,
most holy Mother of God, through your mediation and assistance; through
the grace and love for mankind of your only-begotten Son, our Lord and
God and Saviour, Jesus Christ. To whom are due all glory, honour and
worship, with his Father who is without beginning and his all-holy, good
and life-giving Spirit, now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Prayer to Our Lord Jesus Christ  
by the monk Antiochus.

And grant us, Master, as we go to our sleep, rest of body and soul; and
guard us from the gloomy sleep of sin and from every dark pleasure of
the night. Calm the assaults of the passions, quench the fiery arrows of
the evil one that are cunningly aimed at us, put down the rebellions of
our flesh and still our every earthly and material thought. And grant
us, O God, a watchful mind, chaste thought, a wakeful heart, sleep that
is light and free from every satanic fantasy. Rouse us at the time for
prayer strengthened in your commandments and holding firmly within us
the memory of your judgements. Grant that we may sing your glory all
night long and so hymn, bless and glorify your all honoured and majestic
name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages
of ages. Amen.

Most glorious, ever-Virgin, blessed Mother of God, bring our prayer to
your Son and our God, and ask that through you he may save our souls.

****

Prayer of St Ioannikios

The Father is my hope, the Son my refuge, the Holy Spirit my protection.
Holy Trinity, glory to you.

All my hope I lay on you, O Mother of God, guard me beneath your
shelter.

****

Priest:

** Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you. ****

Reader:

** Glory. Both now. Lord, have mercy (**x3). Holy Father, bless.** ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

Reader:

** And to your spirit. ******

Priest:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

Reader:

** To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

Most merciful Master, Lord Jesus Christ our God, at the prayers of our
all-pure Lady, Mother of God, and ever-virgin Mary; by the power of the
precious and life-giving Cross, the protection of the honourable
heavenly Bodiless Powers, the intercessions of the honourable, glorious
Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John; of the holy, glorious and
all-praised Apostles; of the holy, glorious and right-victorious
Martyrs; of our venerable and god-bearing Fathers; of the holy and just
Forebears of God Joachim and Anne; make our prayer acceptable. Grant us
forgiveness of our offences. Shelter us under the shelter of your wings.
Drive far from us every foe and enemy. Make our lives peaceful. Lord,
have mercy on us and on your world, and save our saves, as you are good
and love mankind. ****

Then the Superior making a metania to the ground says to the Brothers:

Bless, Fathers, and pardon me a sinner. ****

And the Brothers:

** God pardon you, holy Father. **And the Brothers begin two by two, one
from either Choir according to rank, to do the same, and to ask and
receive pardon until all have done so. The Priest says:**

Let us pray for the peace of the world.

**Reader:** ** Lord, have mercy.

For our Archbishop

**N.**, our Superior **N.**, and all our brotherhood in Christ.

For our Sovereign

**N**.

For our absent fathers and brethren.

For those who hate us and for those who love us.

For those who are merciful to us and serve us.

For those who have asked us in our unworthiness to pray for them.

For the release of prisoners.

For those who sail upon the sea.

For those who lie in sickness.

Let us pray for an abundance of the fruits of the earth.

And for every soul of Orthodox Christians.

Let us bless devout Sovereigns.

And Orthodox High Priests.

The Founders of this holy Monastery.

Our parents and teachers, and all our departed fathers and brethren,
Orthodox believers, who here or in all the world lie asleep in the Lord.

****

Reader

\[**during the last petition**\]***:*** May God pardon and have mercy on
them where all the just repose; and have mercy and save us as he is good
and loves mankind.

Let us say also for ourselves, Lord, have mercy (

**x3**) ****

The Superior:

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers. ****

The following Theotokia are sung:

On Monday and Wednesday:

Loving Mother of God Most High, you are the defender of all who take
refuge under your mighty hand; for we sinners, ever bowed down by many
offences, have no other mediation with God in dangers and afflictions.
Therefore we fall before you: Deliver you servants from every peril.

****

On Tuesday and Thursday:

As she looked on your unjust slaughter, O Christ, the Virgin lamented
and cried out to you: My sweetest Child, how are you dying unjustly? You
hung the earth upon the waters, how are you hanging on a tree? Do not, I
beg, leave me, your mother and servant, behind alone, most merciful
Benefactor.

****

And all having received pardon from the Superior, we go back to our
cells, where we say the following prayer.

\[**In practice this prayer is said in the Church by the Reader**\]

To those who hate us and wrong us, Lord, give pardon. To those who do
good, do good. To our brethren and kinsfolk grant their requests that
are for salvation and eternal life. Visit those in sickness and give
them healing. Pilot those at sea. Journey with those who journey. Fight
beside our Sovereign. Grant forgiveness of sins to those who serve us
and have mercy on us. On those who have asked for our prayers, unworthy
though we are, have mercy according to your great mercy. Remember, Lord,
our fathers and brethren who have fallen asleep before us and give them
rest where the light of your face shines. Remember, Lord, our brethren
in captivity, and rescue them from every peril. Remember, Lord, those
who make offerings and care for beauty in your holy churches and give
them their requests which are for salvation and eternal life. Remember
too, Lord, us your humble and unworthy servants, and guide us in the
path of your commandments; at the prayers of your most pure Mother, our
Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, and all your Saints; for you
are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

There, we have set out accurately one day of the holy Fast and put down
with our love the quantity of psalmody and the prostrations that have
been prescribed by the holy Fathers. It is not allowed to cheat over
these, or to defraud the holy lawgiver. The total number of prostrations
in Church for the night and day office, excluding the Midnight Office,
is three hundred. We have received the tradition in Palestine also to
chant the Psalter in our own cells, those who can, the whole Psalter
once every twenty four hours, others three times in the week, others
twice. Each is make the number of prostrations that the Superior has
given him according to his own ability.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

