\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyFri.md) \] \[ [Matins](HWFri-M.md) \]
\[ Royal Hours \] \[ [Vespers](HWFri-V.md) \]

# 

HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY

**SERVICE OF THE ROYAL HOURS**

## FIRST HOUR

****

After the blessing by the Priest, the Superior, or the Reader, continues

Glory to you, our God, glory to you.

Heavenly King, Paraclete, Spirit of truth, present everywhere, filling
all things, Treasury of blessings and Giver of life, come and dwell in
us, cleanse us from every stain, and, O Good One, save our souls.

****

Reader:

** Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three
times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

Three Metanias and the Psalms:

Psalm 5  

Give ear to my words, O Lord, understand my cry. Attend to the voice of
my supplication, my King and my God; for to you I shall pray, O Lord. In
the morning you will hear my voice. In the morning I shall stand before
you, and you will watch over me; because you are not a God who wants
iniquity. The evildoer will not dwell with you, nor will the lawless
remain before your eyes. You have hated all those who work iniquity; you
will destroy all those who speak lies. The Lord abhors a man of
bloodshed and deceit. But I in the abundance of your mercy shall enter
your house, I shall worship towards your holy temple in fear of you.
Guide me, Lord, in your righteousness because of my enemies, direct my
way before you. Because there is no truth in their mouths; their heart
is vain. Their throat is an open tomb, they deceive with their tongues.
Judge them, O God. Let them fall through their counsels; according to
the multitude of their impieties cast them out, for they have embittered
you, O Lord. And may all those who hope in you be glad; they will
rejoice for ever, and you will dwell among them, and all those who love
your name will boast in you. Because you will bless the righteous; you
have crowned him, O Lord, with your good pleasure. ****

Psalm 2

A Psalm of David.

Why were the nations insolent and why did the peoples meditate vain
things? The kings of the earth stood up and the rulers were assembled
together against the Lord and against his Christ. ‘Let us break through
their bonds and cast away their yoke from us.’ He that dwells in heaven
will laugh them to scorn and the Lord will mock them. Then he will speak
to them in his anger and panic them in his fury. But I was established
as king by him, on Sion his holy mountain announcing the Lord’s decree:
The Lord said to me: ‘You are my Son. Today I have begotten you. Ask me,
and I shall give you nations as your inheritance, and the ends of the
earth as your possession. You will shepherd them with an iron rod; like
a potter’s vessels you will smash them.’ And now, kings, understand; be
corrected, all who judge the earth. Serve the Lord in fear and rejoice
in him with trembling. Accept correction, lest the Lord be angry, and
you perish from the right way whenever his fury is suddenly kindled.
Blessed are all who have put their trust in him.

****

Psalm 21

To the end, concerning help at dawn. a Psalm of David.

O God, my God, attend to me; why have you abandoned me? Far from
salvation are the words of my offences. My God, I shall cry by day, and
you will not hear; and by night, and it shall be no folly for me. But
you, the praise of Israel, dwell in the Holy Place. Our fathers hoped in
you, they hoped and you delivered them. They cried to you and they were
saved, they hoped in you and they were not shamed. But I am a worm and
not a man, the scorn of men and the outcast of the people. All who saw
me jeered at me, they spoke with their lips, they wagged their heads.
‘He hoped in the Lord, let him deliver him, let him save him, for he
wants him’. For you are the one who drew me from the womb, my hope from
my mother’s breasts; on you I have been cast since the womb. From my
mother’s womb you are my God, do not abandon me. For trouble is near,
for there is no one to help me. Many bullocks have surrounded me, fat
bulls have assailed me. They opened their mouths against me, like a lion
ravening and roaring. I have been poured out like water, and all my
bones have been scattered, my heart has become like wax melting inside
me. My strength has dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue has stuck to
my throat, and you have led me down into the dust of death, For many
dogs have surrounded me, an assembly of evil doers has assailed me. They
have dug my hands and my feet; all my bones have been numbered; they
have observed me and gazed at me. They have parted my garments among
them and cast lots for my clothing . But you, Lord, do not keep your
help far from me, be attentive to my defence. Deliver my soul from the
sword and my only one from the hand of the dog. Save me from the lion’s
mouth and my lowliness from the horns of unicorns. I shall declare your
name to my brethren, I shall hymn you in the midst of the Church. Those
who fear the Lord, praise him, all the seed of Jacob glorify him. Let
all the seed of Israel fear him. For he has not spurned nor slighted the
pauper’s supplication, nor has he turned his face from me; and he heard
me when I called upon him. From you is my praise; in the great Church I
shall confess you; I shall pay my vows before those who fear you. The
poor will eat and be filled, those who seek the Lord will praise him;
their hearts will live for ever. All the ends of the earth will remember
and turn back to the Lord and all the families of the nations will
worship before him. For the kingdom is the Lord’s and he is master of
the nations. All the fat ones of the earth have eaten and worshipped;
all those who go down into the earth will fall down before him. And my
soul lives for him, and my seed will serve him. The coming generation
will be proclaimed to the Lord, and they will proclaim his justice to a
people yet to be born, whom the Lord has made.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**). Lord, have mercy (**x3**).

Glory.

**** Tone 1**

When you were crucified, O Christ, the tyranny of the enemy was
destroyed, his power trampled underfoot; for it was not an Angel, not a
human, but you, the Lord himself, who saved us. Glory to you\!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

What shall we call you, O Full of grace? Heaven? For you made the Sun of
righteousness to dawn. Paradise? For you made the flower of incorruption
blossom. Virgin? For you remained incorrupt. Pure Mother? For you held
in your holy embrace a Son who is the God of all. Implore Him that our
souls may be saved.

****

And we sing at once the following idiomels in Tone 8:

Today the veil of the Temple is rent, as a reproof against the
transgressors; and the sun hides its own rays, as it sees the Master
crucified. (

**Twice, without a verse**) ****

Verse:

Why were the nations insolent and why did the peoples meditate vain
things?

You were led like a sheep to the slaughter, Christ King, and as an
innocent lamb you were nailed to the Cross by lawless men for our sins,
O Lover of mankind.

****

Verse:

The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were assembled together
against the Lord and against his Christ.

You were led like a sheep to the slaughter, Christ King, and as an
innocent lamb you were nailed to the Cross by lawless men for our sins,
O Lover of mankind.

Glory.

**** Same Tone.**

Allowing the lawless to arrest you, Lord, you cried out, ‘Though you
strike the shepherd and scatter the twelve sheep, my disciples, I could
call to my side more than twelve legions of Angels; but I forbear, that
the hidden and secret things, which I revealed to you through my
Prophets, may be fulfilled.’ Lord, glory to you\!

Both now.

Allowing the lawless to arrest you, Lord, you cried out, ‘Though you
strike the shepherd and scatter the twelve sheep, my disciples, I could
call to my side more than twelve legions of Angels; but I forbear, that
the hidden and secret things, which I revealed to you through my
Prophets, may be fulfilled.’ Lord, glory to you\!

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. \[

**Psalm 40**\]

He gathered iniquity to himself; he went out and spoke in the same
manner.

****

Verse:

Blessed is one who considers the poor and needy; the Lord will deliver
in an evil day.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Zachary  
\[

**11:10-13**\]

Thus says the Lord: I shall take my beautiful staff and I shall throw it
away, to annul my covenant that I had made with all the peoples. And it
shall be annulled on that day, and the Chananites, the sheep that will
be guarded for me, will know that it is the word of the Lord. And I
shall say to them, ‘If it seems right to you, weigh out and give me my
wages; but if not, keep them.’ So they weighed out as my wages thirty
pieces of silver. Then the Lord said to me, ‘Cast it into the furnace,
and see if it is proved metal, in the same way that I was proved by
them. So I took the thirty pieces of silver and threw them into the
furnace into the house of the Lord, as the Lord had commanded me.

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians.  
\[

**6:14-18**\]

Brethren, may I never boast of anything except the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, by which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the
world. For neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is anything; but a
new creation is everything\! As for those who will follow this rule -
peace be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. From now on,
let no one make trouble for me; for I carry the marks of the Lord Jesus
branded on my body. May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit, brethren. Amen.

****

After the reading from the Apostle:

Priest:

** And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let
us pray to the Lord God. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Matthew. ****

Reader:

Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you\!

\[

**27:1-56**\]

At that time, when morning had come, all the chief priests and the
elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. And
having bound him, they led him away and handed him over to Pontius
Pilate the governor. Judas, seeing that Jesus had been condemned,
repented and returned the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests
and elders, saying, ‘I have sinned by betraying innocent blood.’ But
they said, ‘What is that to us? See to it yourself.’ And flinging down
the pieces of silver in the temple he went away and hanged himself. But
the chief priests picked up the pieces of silver and said, ‘It is not
permitted to put them into the treasury, because they are the price of
blood.’ So they conferred together and bought with them the potter’s
field as a burial place for foreigners. And so that field has been
called *Field of Blood* until today. Then what had been said by the
prophet Jeremy was fulfilled, when he said, And the took the thirty
pieces of silver, the price of the one who was prized, whom they prized
from the children of Israel, and gave them for the potter’s field, as
the Lord had commanded me. But Jesus stood before the governor, and the
governor questioned him saying, ‘Are you the king of the Jews?’ Jesus
said to him, ‘You say so.’ And when he was accused by the chief priests
and elders he made no answer. Then Pilate says to him, ‘Do you not hear
how many things they are testifying against you?’ But he did not answer
him with s single word, so that the governor was greatly amazed. Now on
the occasion of the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the
crowd one prisoner whom they wished. They had at the time a notorious
prisoner called Barabbas. So when they had assembled Pilate said to
them, ‘Whom do wish me to release to you? Barabbas or Jesus called
Christ?’ For he knew that they had handed him over through envy. But
while he was seated on the tribunal, his wife sent to him saying, ‘Have
nothing to do with that just man. For I have suffered many things today
in a dream because of him.’ But the chief priests and elders had
persuaded the crowds that they should ask for Barabbas. Pilate says to
them, ‘So what shall I do with Jesus called Christ?’ They say to him,
‘Let him be crucified\!’ The governor said, ‘Why, what evil has he
done?’ But they shouted even louder, saying, ‘Let him be crucified\!’ So
Pilate, seeing that he was getting nowhere, but that a riot was starting
instead, took water and washed his hands in full view of the crowd,
saying, ‘I am innocent of the blood of this just man. You look to it.’
And the whole people answered and said, ‘His blood be on us and on our
children.’ Then he released Barabbas to them, but Jesus he had scourged
and handed him over to be crucified. Then the governor’s soldiers took
Jesus into the praetorium and gathered the whole cohort round him. They
stripped him and dressed him in a scarlet cloak, and having woven a
crown of thorns, they placed it on his head and a reed in his right
hand. Then they knelt in front of him and mocked him, saying, ‘Hail,
King of the Jews\!’ They spat on him and took the reed and struck it on
his head. And when they had mocked him, they took off the cloak and
dressed him in his own clothes and led him away to crucify him. As they
went out they found a Cyrenian named Simon; they forced him to carry his
cross. At that time, when the soldiers had reached a place called
Golgotha, which means place of a Skull, they gave him vinegar to drink
mixed with gall. And when he had tasted it he would not drink. But when
they had crucified him they divided up his garments, casting lots. And
they sat there and watched him. And they placed over his head his
written accusation: This is Jesus the king of the Jews. Then they
crucified with him two thieves, one on his right and one on his left.
While the passers by blasphemed him, wagging their heads and saying,
‘You who destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days\! Save
yourself. If you are Son of God, come down from the cross.’ Likewise the
chief priests mocked him along with the scribes and elders and
Pharisees, saying, ‘He saved others. He cannot save himself. If he is
the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross and we will
believe in him. He trusted in God, let him now deliver him, if he wants
him. For he said, ‘I am the son of God.’ And the thieves who were
crucified with him reviled him in the same way. Now from the sixth hour
there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour. But around
the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, ‘Eli, Eli,
lama savachthani?’ That is, ‘My God, my God, why have you abandoned me?’
Some of those who stood there when they heard this said, ‘This one is
calling on Elias.’ And immediately one of them ran and taking a sponge
filled it with vinegar and putting it one a reed gave him to drink. But
the rest said, ‘Stop, let us see if Elias is coming to help him,’ But
Jesus, having once more cried out with a loud voice, gave up the spirit.
And behold, the veil of the Temple was rent in two, from the top to the
bottom, and the earth was shaken and the rocks were rent, and the graves
were opened, and many bodies of the saints that slept were raised, and
coming out of their graves after his rising they entered the Holy City
and appeared to many. But the centurion and those with him, when they
saw the earthquake and all that happened, were greatly afraid and said,
‘Truly this was a son of God.’ And there were many women there,
watching from a distance. They had followed Jesus from Galilee,
ministering to him. Among them were Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of
James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.

****

Reader:

Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you\! ****

At once the Reader says:

Direct my steps according to your word, and let no iniquity lord it over
me. Deliver me from the slander of men, and I shall keep your
commandments. Let your face shine on your servant, and teach me your
statutes. Let my mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that I may
hymn your glory, all day long your splendour.

****

Then:

** Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us. (**Three
times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come; your
will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Kontakion.

Come, let us all sing the praise of him who was crucified for us; for
Mary looked upon him on the Tree and said: ‘Though you endure the Cross,
yet you are my Son and my God’.

****

Then:

Lord, have mercy. (**x40**)

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the blessings to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

** May God take pity on us and bless us, and make his face shine on us
and have mercy on us. ****

And the Superior says the following prayer:

Christ, the true light, who enlighten and hallow everyone who comes into
the world, may the light of your countenance be signed upon us, that in
it we may see your unapproachable light; and direct our steps to the
doing of your commandments; at the intercessions of your all-most pure
Mother and of all your Saints. Amen.

****

Reader:

** To you my Champion and Commander I your city saved from disasters
dedicate, O Mother of God, hymns of victory and thanksgiving; but as you
have unassailable might from every kind of danger now deliver me, that I
may cry to you: Hail, Bride without bridegroom\! ****

We read

CATECHESIS 73

On the Saving Passion of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ  

**by our Venerable Father Theodore the Studite.**

Brethren and Fathers, while the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ when
they are recalled are always able to pierce the soul, they do so
especially in these present days, on which each of them reached its end.
What then are they? The murderous council against him, the Jewish
arrest, his being led away to death, his arraignment before Pilate’s
tribunal, the interrogation, the scourging, the blows, the spittings,
the insults, the mockeries, the ascent of the Cross, the nailing of his
hands and feet, the tasting of gall, the piercing of his side and all
the other things which blazed forth with them, which the world cannot
contain, nor can anyone worthily proclaim, not human tongue, nor even
all the tongues of angels together. For let us consider, brethren, this
great and ineffable mystery. The Lord *who reveals the counsels of
hearts* and knows every human desire is the one who is taken before a
council of death; the Lord *who bears all things by the word of his
power* is the one who is handed over to sinners; the Lord *who binds the
water in the clouds* and sows in the earth in due season and uniformly
is the one who is led away prisoner; the Lord *who measures the heavens
with the span of his hand and the earth in a handful and weighed all the
mountains in the balance* is the one who is struck by the hand of a
servant; the Lord who adorned the boundaries of the earth with flowers
is the one who is dishonourably crowned with thorns; the Lord who
planted the tree of life in Paradise is the one who is hanged upon an
accursed tree. O great and more then natural sights\! The sun saw them
and faded, the moon saw them and was darkened, the earth perceived them
was shaken, the rocks perceived them and were rent, all creation was
turned back at the outrages done to the Master. The lifeless elements
which have no senses, as if endowed with life and sensation from fear of
the Lord and from the spectacle of what is seen, were amazed and
altered; and do we, who have been honoured with reason, for whose sake
Christ died, remain untouched and unweeping in these days? How could we
be less rational than things which have no reason, more unfeeling than
the stones? In no way, my brothers, in no way. Let us rather be amazed
in a manner worthy of God, by being changed with a fair change; let us
draw down tears, sacrifice the passions, changing insults for insults
and exchanging wounds for wounds, the one through obedience, the other
through unflinching confession. Do we not see the burning incitements of
divine love? Who ever dwelt in prison for a friend? Who accepted
slaughter for their beloved? But our good God not only did the one and
both of them, but accepted ten thousand sufferings for the sake of us,
the condemned. Fittingly then the blessed Apostle, when he thought on
these things and became powerfully aware of the love of God, said *For I
am persuaded that neither death nor life, neither angels nor rules nor
powers, neither present nor future, neither height nor depth, nor any
other creature will be able to separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus our Lord*. For such was the love God had for us *that he
gave his only Son, that all who believe in him might not perish, as it
is written, but have eternal life.* As an exchange for this love, the
saints, when they had nothing to offer, offered their own bodies and
blood by asceticism and struggle, singing with blessed David the song:
*What return may we make to the Lord for all that he has given to us?*
Let us also, brethren, cry out these words each day, as we serve him
with an unceasing attitude of love, striving again and again for what is
better, so that we may become heirs with the saints of the eternal
blessings in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and might with the
Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

## 

THIRD HOUR

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
O Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our God.  
O Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King,
our God.

****

Three Metanias and the Psalms.

Psalm 34  

Lord, judge those that wrong me, make war on those who war against me.
Take up weapon and shield and arise to my help. Draw the sword and block
the way of those who persecute me; say to my soul: I am your salvation.
Let those who seek my life be put to shame and turned back, let those
who devise evils against me be routed and put utterly to shame. Let them
be like dust before the wind, with the Angel of the Lord afflicting
them. Let their way become dark and slippery, with the Angel of the Lord
pursuing them. Because they hid for me a snare of destruction; without
cause they reviled my soul. Let a snare which they do not know come upon
them, and let the trap which they hid seize them, and let them fall into
the very same snare. But my soul will rejoice in the Lord, it will
delight in his salvation. All my bones will say: Lord, who is like you?
Who deliver the poor from those who are stronger, and the poor and needy
from those that despoil them. Unjust witnesses arose and asked me things
of which I knew nothing. They repaid me evils for good, and bereavement
for my soul. But I, when they troubled me, put on sackcloth and humbled
my soul with fasting, and my prayer shall return to my own bosom. I
acted pleasantly towards them, as to our neighbour or brother; as one
mourning and downcast I humbled myself. Yet they rejoiced against me and
scourges were assembled, assembled against me, and I knew it not. They
were scattered, but felt no compunction. They put me to the test, they
reviled me utterly, they gnashed their teeth against me. Lord, when will
you look upon me? Deliver my life from their malice, my only life from
lions. I will give you thanks in a great congregation, among a numerous
people I will praise you. Do not let those who are hostile to me without
cause rejoice against me; those who hate me for nothing and who wink
with their eyes. Because they spoke things of peace to me, but imagined
trickeries in anger. And they opened wide their mouths against me; they
said: Fine, fine, our eyes have seen. You have seen, Lord, do not keep
silent; Lord, do not withdraw from me. Rise, Lord, and attend to my
judgement; my God and my Lord to my cause. Judge me, O God, according to
your righteousness, O Lord my God; and do not let them rejoice over me.
Let them not say in their hearts: Fine, fine it is to our soul; nor let
them say: We have swallowed him down. Let those who rejoice at my
afflictions be put to shame and turned back together; let those who
speak proud words against me be clothed in shame and confusion. Let
those who wish my righteousness rejoice and be glad, and let those who
wish the peace of his servant ever say: The Lord be magnified. And my
tongue will meditate on your justice; all day long on your praise. ****

Psalm 108  

Do not be silent, O God of my praise. For wicked and deceitful mouths
are opened against me, speaking against me with lying tongues. They
beset me with words of hate, and attack me without cause. In return for
my love they accuse me, even while I make prayer for them. So they
reward me evil for good, and hatred for my love. They say, ‘Appoint a
wicked man against him; let an accuser stand on his right. When he is
tried, let him be found guilty; let his prayer be counted as sin. May
his days be few; may another seize his position. May his children be
orphans, and his wife a widow. May his children wander about and beg;
may they be driven out of the ruins they inhabit. May the creditor seize
all that he has; may strangers plunder the fruits of his toil. May there
be no one to do him a kindness, nor anyone to pity his orphaned
children. May his posterity be cut off; may his name be blotted out in
the second generation. May the iniquity of his father be remembered
before the Lord, and do not let the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Let them be before the Lord continually, and may his memory be cut off
from the earth. For he did not remember to show kindness, but pursued
the poor and needy and the broken-hearted to their death. He loved to
curse; let curses come on him. He did not like blessing; may it be far
from him. He clothed himself with cursing as his coat, may it soak into
his body like water, like oil into his bones. May it be like a garment
that he wraps around himself, like a belt that he wears every day.’ May
that be the reward of my accusers from the Lord, of those who speak evil
against my life. But you, O Lord my Lord, act on my behalf for your
name’s sake; because your steadfast love is good, deliver me. For I am
poor and needy, and my heart is pierced within me. I am gone like a
shadow at evening; I am shaken off like a locust. My knees are weak
through fasting; my body has become gaunt. I am an object of scorn to my
accusers; when they see me, they shake their heads. Help me, O Lord my
God\! Save me according to your steadfast love. Let them know that this
is your hand; you, O Lord, have done it. Let them curse, but you will
bless. Let my assailants be put to shame; may your servant be glad. May
my accusers be clothed with dishonour; may they be wrapped in their own
shame as in a mantle. With my mouth I will give great thanks to the
LORD; I will praise him in the midst of the throng. For he stands at the
right hand of the needy, to save them from those who would condemn them
to death. ****

Psalm 50

**  
**Have mercy on me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy.
According to the multitude of your compassion blot out my offence. Wash
me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I
acknowledge my wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. Against you
only I have sinned and done what is evil in your sight, that you may be
justified in your words and win when you are judged. For see, in
wickedness I was conceived and in sin my mother bore me. For see, you
have loved truth; you have shown me the hidden and secret things of your
wisdom. You will sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be cleansed. You
will wash me and I shall be made whiter than snow. You will make me hear
of joy and gladness; the bones which have been humbled will rejoice.
Turn away your face from my sins and blot out all my iniquities. Create
a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Do not
cast me out from your presence, and do not take your Holy Spirit from
me. Give me back the joy of your salvation, and establish me with your
sovereign Spirit. I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will
turn to you again. O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from
bloodshed and my tongue will rejoice at your justice. Lord, you will
open my lips, and my mouth will proclaim your praise. For if you had
wanted a sacrifice, I would have given it. You will not take pleasure in
burnt offerings. A sacrifice to God is a broken spirit. A broken and a
humbled heart God will not despise. Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good
pleasure, and let the walls of Jerusalem be rebuilt. Then you will be
well pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, oblation and whole burnt
offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**). Lord, have mercy (**x3**).

Glory.

**Tone 6**

Lord, the Jews condemned you, the life of all, to death; those who by a
staff crossed the Red Sea on foot nailed you to a cross, and those who
sucked honey from a rock offered you gall. But you endured willingly,
that you might free us from the slavery of the foe. Christ God, glory to
you\!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Mother of God, you are the true vine, who gave bud to the fruit of life;
we implore you, Sovereign Lady, intercede together with the Apostles and
all the Saints that you have mercy on our souls.

****

After which we sing the following Idiomels in Tone 8:

Through fear of the Jews Peter, your friend and neighbour, denied you,
Lord; and in bitter grief he cried out: Do not pass by my tears in
silence, compassionate Master; for I said I would keep faith, but have
not kept it. Accept our repentance too, and have mercy on us. (

**Twice, without a verse**) ****

Verse:

Give ear to my words, O Lord; understand my cry.

Before your precious Cross as the soldiers mocked you, Lord, the
spiritual hosts were struck with amazement. For you were wreathed with a
crown of outrage, you who painted the earth with flowers; and you wore a
cloak of mockery, you who wrap the firmament in clouds; by such a
dispensation was your compassion made known, O Christ, and your great
mercy. Glory to you\!

****

Verse:

Attend to the voice of my prayer, my King and my God.

Before your precious Cross as the soldiers mocked you, Lord, the
spiritual hosts were struck with amazement. For you were wreathed with a
crown of outrage, you who painted the earth with flowers; and you wore a
cloak of mockery, you who wrap the firmament in clouds; by such a
dispensation was your compassion made known, O Christ, and your great
mercy. Glory to you\!

Glory.

As you were dragged to the Cross, Lord, you cried out thus: For what
work do you wish to crucify me, O Jews? Because I braced the paralytic?
Because I raised the dead from sleep? I healed the woman with an issue
of blood, I took pity on the woman of Canaan. For what work do you wish
to slay me, O Jews? But, transgressors, you will see Christ whom now you
pierce.

Both now.

As you were dragged to the Cross, Lord, you cried out thus: For what
work do you wish to crucify me, O Jews? Because I braced the paralytic?
Because I raised the dead from sleep? I healed the woman with an issue
of blood, I took pity on the woman of Canaan. For what work do you wish
to slay me, O Jews? But, transgressors, you will see Christ whom now you
pierce.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. \[

**Psalm 37**\]

For I am ready for scourges; \* and my pain is with me continually.

****

Verse:

O Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chasten me in your wrath.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[

**50:4-11**\]

The Lord God has given me the tongue of instruction, that I may know
when to speak a word. Very early in the morning he has given me, given
me an ear to hear; and the instruction of the Lord, of the Lord opens my
ear, and I do not disobey, I do not dispute. I gave my back to scourges,
and my cheeks to blows; I did not turn my face from the shame of
spitting. The Lord God became my helper; therefore I was not ashamed,
but I set my face like solid rock, and I knew that I would not be put to
shame; he who justifies me is near. Who will contend with me? Let him
stand up against me at the same time; who will contend with me? Let him
draw near me. See, the Lord, the Lord will help me; who will injure me?
All of you will wear out like a garment; the moth will eat you up. Who
among you fears the Lord? Let him obey the voice of his servant; you
that walk in darkness and have no light, trust in the name of the Lord
and place your reliance on God? See, all of you burn like fire, make the
flame grow strong. Walk in the light of your fire, and in the flame that
you have kindled\! For my sake this happened to you: you shall lie down
in sorrow.

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Romans.  
\[

**5:6-10**\]

Brethren, while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for
the ungodly. Indeed, rarely will anyone die for a righteous person -
though perhaps for a good person someone might actually dare to die. But
God proves his love for us in that while we still were sinners Christ
died for us. Much more surely then, now that we have been justified by
his blood, will we be saved through him from the wrath. For if while we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son,
much more surely, having been reconciled, will we be saved by his life.

****

After the reading from the Apostle:

Priest:

** And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let
us pray to the Lord God. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Mark. ****

Reader:

** Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you\!

\[

**15:16-32**\]

At that time, the soldiers led Jesus into the courtyard, that is the
praetorium, and summoned the whole cohort. They clothed him in purple
and having plaited a crown of thorns placed it on him, and they began to
salute him and say, ‘Hail, king of the Jews\!’ And they kept striking
his head with a reed and spitting on him, and they bowed the knee and
did him homage. And when they had mocked him they took off the purple
and dressed him in his own clothes and led him out to crucify him. And
they forced Simon, a Cyrenian, who was coming from the country, the
father of Alexander and Rufus, to carry his cross. And they bring him to
a place Golgotha, which means place of a skull. And they gave him wine
drugged with myrrh to drink. It was the third hour and they crucified
him. And the inscription of his charge ran, ‘The King of the Jews.’ And
with him they crucified two thieves, one on the right and one on the
left. And the scripture was fulfilled which says, He was counted among
transgressors. And the passers by blasphemed him, shaking their heads
and saying, ‘Aha\! You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in
three days\! Save yourself and come down from the cross.’ Likewise the
chief priests also mocked him among themselves with the scribes and
said, ‘He saved others. He cannot save himself. Let Christ the king of
Israel now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe in
him.’ Those who were crucified with him also taunted him. When it was
the sixth hour, darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.
At the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, ‘Eloi, Eloi, lema
sabachthani?’ which means, ‘My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?’
When some of the bystanders heard it, they said, ‘Listen, he is calling
for Elias.’ And someone ran, filled a sponge with vinegar, put it on a
stick, and gave it to him to drink, saying, ‘Wait, let us see if Elias
is coming to take him down.’ Then Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his
last. And the veil of the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom.
Now when the centurion, who stood facing him, saw that he cried out in
this way and he breathed his last, he said, ‘Truly this man was Son of
God\!’ There were also women looking on from a distance; among them were
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James the younger and of Joses,
and Salome. These used to follow him when he was in Galilee and minister
to him; and there were many other women who had come up with him to
Jerusalem.

****

After the reading:

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\!

Blessed is the Lord God, blessed is the Lord day by day; may the God of
our salvation give us prosperity.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Kontakion.

Come, let us all sing the praise of him who was crucified for us; for
Mary looked upon him on the Tree and said: ‘Though you endure the Cross,
yet you are my Son and my God’.

****

Then:

Lord, have mercy. (**x40**)

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the blessings to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

** May God take pity on us and be merciful to us, and make his face
shine on us and have mercy on us. ****

And the Superior says the following  
Prayer of St Mardarios

God and Master, Father almighty, Lord, only begotten Son, Jesus Christ
and Holy Spirit, one godhead, one power, have mercy on me a sinner; and
by the judgements which you know, save me your unworthy servant; for you
are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.

## 

SIXTH HOUR

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our God.  
Come, let us fall down and worship before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

With 3 Metanias, then the Psalms.

Psalm 53  

O God, save my by your name, and you will judge me by your power. O God,
hear my prayer, give ear to the words of my mouth. For strangers have
risen up against me, and mighty ones have sought my soul, and have not
put God before them. For see, God will help me, and the Lord is the
protector of my soul. He will turn evils upon my foes, in your truth
wipe them out. Willingly I shall sacrifice to you, I shall give thanks
to your name, O Lord, for it is good. For you have delivered me from
every tribulation, and my eye has looked down on my foes. ****

Psalm 139

**  
**Deliver me, O Lord, from evildoers; protect me from those who are
violent, who plan evil things in their minds and stir up wars
continually. They make their tongue sharp as a snake’s, and under their
lips is the venom of vipers. Guard me, O Lord, from the hands of the
wicked; protect me from the violent who have planned my downfall. The
arrogant have hidden a trap for me, and with cords they have spread a
net, along the road they have set snares for me. I say to the Lord, ‘You
are my God; give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my supplications.’ O Lord,
my Lord, my strong deliverer, you have covered my head in the day of
battle. Do not grant, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; do not further
their evil plot. Those who surround me lift up their heads; let the
mischief of their lips overwhelm them\! Let burning coals fall on them\!
Let them be flung into pits, no more to rise\! Do not let the slanderer
be established in the land; let evil speedily hunt down the violent\! I
know that the Lord maintains the cause of the needy, and executes
justice for the poor. Surely the righteous shall give thanks to your
name; the upright shall live in your presence. ****

Psalm 90

  
One who dwells in the help of the Most High will live under the
protection of the of the God of heaven; will say to the Lord: you are my
protector and my refuge, my God, and I shall hope in him. For he will
deliver you from the snare of hunters, and from the word which troubles.
He will overshadow you with his wings, and beneath his feathers you will
hope; his truth will encircle you with a shield. You will not be afraid
of terror by night, of the arrow that flies by day; of the thing that
prowls in the darkness, of mishap and the noonday devil. A thousand may
fall at your side, and ten thousand at your right, but it will not come
near you. But with your eyes you will observe, and see the reward of
sinners. For you, Lord, are my hope: you have made the Most High your
refuge. Evils will not approach you, nor a scourge draw near your
dwelling. Because he has given orders to his Angels about you, to guard
you in all your ways. They will bear you on their hands, lest you dash
your foot against a stone. You will walk on asp and basilisk, and
trample down lion and dragon. Because he hoped in me, I shall deliver
him; I shall shelter him, because he knew my name. He will cry to me,
and I shall hear him, I am with him in trouble; I shall rescue him and
glorify him. I shall fill him with length of days, and show him my
salvation.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**). Lord, have mercy (**x3**).

Glory.

**Tone 2**

You have worked salvation in the midst of the earth, Christ our God. You
stretched out your most pure hands on the Cross, gathering together all
the nations, as they cry: Lord, glory to you\!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Because we have no boldness because of our many sins, entreat the One
born of you, O Virgin Mother of God; for a Mother*’*s plea has great
force for the kindness of the Master. Do not despise the supplications
of sinners, O all-holy, for you is merciful, and able to save, you who
even accepted to suffer for us.

****

After which we sing the following Idiomels in Tone 8.

Thus says the Lord to the Jews, ‘My people, what have I done to you? Or
in what have I wearied you? I gave light to your blind, I cleansed your
lepers, I set upright a man lying on a bed. My people, what have I done
to you, and how have you repaid me? Instead of the manna gall; instead
of the water vinegar; instead of loving me, you have nailed me to a
cross. I can endure no longer; I will call my nations, and they will
glorify me, with the Father and the Spirit; and I shall grant them
eternal life. (

**twice, without a verse**) ****

Verse:

They gave me gall for food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink.

Lawgivers of Israel, Jews and Pharisees, the choir of the Apostles cries
out to you, ‘See a Temple, which you have destroyed\! See a Lamb, whom
you have crucified\! You handed him over to a tomb, but by his own
authority he has risen. Do not be deceived, O Jews, for it is he who
saved you in the sea, and fed you in the desert; he is the life and the
light and the peace of the world.

****

Verse:

Save me, O God; for the waters have come in, even as far as my soul.

Lawgivers of Israel, Jews and Pharisees, the choir of the Apostles cries
out to you: See a Temple, which you have destroyed; see a Lamb, whom you
have crucified. You handed him over to a tomb, but by his own authority
he has risen. Do not be deceived, O Jews, for it is he who saved you in
the sea, and fed you in the desert; he is the life and the light and the
peace of the world.

Glory.

**Tone 5**

Come, Christ-bearing peoples, let us see what Judas the betrayer has
plotted with the lawless priests against our Saviour. Today they have
found the immortal Word guilty of death, and having betrayed him to
Pilate, crucified him on the place of the Skull. And as he suffered all
this our Saviour cried out and said, ‘Forgive them this sin, Father,
that the nations may know my Resurrection from the dead’.

Both now.

Come, Christ-bearing peoples, let us see what Judas the betrayer has
plotted with the lawless priests against our Saviour. Today they have
found the immortal Word guilty of death, and having betrayed him to
Pilate, crucified him on the place of the Skull. And as he suffered all
this our Saviour cried out and said, ‘Forgive them this sin, Father,
that the nations may know my Resurrection from the dead’.

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. \[

**Psalm 8**\]

Lord, our Lord, how wonderful is your name \* in all the earth\!

****

Verse:

** For your majesty is raised high above the heavens.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[**52:13-53:12\]**

Thus says the Lord: See, my servant will understand; he shall be exalted
and glorified exceedingly. Just as there many will be astonished at you,
so your appearance will be without glory from men, and your glory from
the sons of men. So many nations will marvel at him; kings shall shut
their mouths; for that which had not been told them about him they shall
see, and that which they had not heard they shall contemplate. Who has
believed what we have heard? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been
revealed? We brought a report as of a child before him, as a root out of
dry ground; he had no form or glory, and we saw him, and he had neither
form nor beauty. But his form was without honour and inferior to the
children of men. He was a man in suffering and acquainted with bearing
weakness, because his face has been away, he was dishonoured and not
esteemed. He bears our sins and is in pain for us. We reckoned him to be
in toil and in affliction and trouble. But he was wounded for our sins
and crushed for our iniquities; upon him was the punishment of our
peace, and by his bruises we are healed. All we like sheep have gone
astray; Every one has gone astray in their own way, and the Lord handed
him over for our sins. And he, because of his affliction, does not open
his mouth; like a sheep he was led to the slaughter, and like a lamb
before its shearer is silent, so he does not open his mouth. In his
humiliation his judgement was taken away; who shall declare his
generation? for his life is taken away from the earth; because of the
iniquities of my people he was led to death. And I will give the evil
for his burial and the rich for his death, because he practised no
iniquity, nor was there guile in his mouth. And the Lord wishes to
cleanse him of his blow. If you give an offering for sin, your soul will
seed a long-lived descendence. And the Lord wishes to take away from the
toil of his soul, to show him light and to fashion him with
understanding, to justify the just one, who serves many well, and he
will bear their sins. Therefore he will inherit many and divide the
spoils of the strong. Because his soul was handed over to death, and was
numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the sin of many, and was
handed over because of their iniquities. Rejoice, barren one who do not
give birth, break out and cry, you who are not in labour, for the
children of the desolate are more than those of her that has a husband.

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.  
\[**2:11-18\]**

Brethren, the one who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all
from One. For this reason he is not ashamed to call them brethren
saying, ‘I will proclaim your name to my brethren, in the midst of the
church I will praise you.’ And again, ‘I will put my trust in him.’ And
again, ‘Here am I and the children whom God has given me.’ Since,
therefore, the children share flesh and blood, he himself likewise
shared the same things, so that through death he might destroy the one
who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and free those who all
their lives were held in slavery by the fear of death. For it is clear
he did not take upon himself the nature angels, but he took on that of
the descendants of Abraham. Therefore he had to become like his brethren
in every respect, so that he might be a merciful and faithful high
priest in the things of God, to make atonement for the sins of the
people. For because he himself was tested by what he suffered, he is
able to help those who are being tested.

****

After the reading from the Apostle:

Priest:

** And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let
us pray to the Lord God. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Luke. ****

Reader:

** Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you\!

\[

**23:32-49**\]

At that time two others, who were criminals, were led out with Jesus to
be put to death with him. And when they had come to the place called The
Skull, they crucified him there and the criminals, one on the right and
one on the left. But Jesus said, ‘Father, forgive them, for they do not
know what they are doing.’ And dividing his garments they cast lots. And
the people stood by watching. While with them the rulers too scoffed at
him, saying, ‘He saved others; let him save himself, if he is the
Christ, the chosen one of God.’ And the soldiers also mocked him, coming
up and offering him vinegar and saying, ‘If you the king of the Jews,
save yourself.’ Now there was also an inscription over him written in
Greek, Roman and Hebrew letters, ‘This is the king of the Jews.’ One of
the evil-doers who were hanged there with him blasphemed him, saying,
‘If you are the Christ, save yourself and us.’ But the other answering
rebuked him, saying, ‘Do you not fear God, for you are under the same
sentence of condemnation? But we indeed justly, for we are being paid
fittingly for what we did; but this man has done nothing wrong.’ And he
said to Jesus, ‘Remember me, Lord, when you come in your kingdom.’ And
Jesus said to him, ‘Amen, I say to you, today you will be with me in
Paradise.’ Now it was about the sixth hour and there was darkness over
the whole land until the ninth hour, and the sun’s light disappeared and
the veil of the Temple was rent down the middle. And Jesus having cried
out with a loud voice said, ‘Father, into your hands I entrust my
spirit.’ And when he had said this he breathed his last. But the
centurion on seeing what had happened glorified God and said, ‘Indeed
this was a just man.’ And all the crowds who had gathered for the
spectacle returned home beating their breasts. But all his acquaintances
stood at a distance and the women who had followed him from Galilee
watching these things.

****

After the reading:

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\!

Let your mercies, O Lord, come quickly to our aid, for we are utterly
poor; help us, O God our Saviour, for the glory of your name. O Lord,
deliver us, and have mercy on our sins, for your name*’*s sake.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen. ****

Kontakion

Come, let us all sing the praise of him who was crucified for us; for
Mary looked upon him on the Tree and said: ‘Though you endure the Cross,
yet you are my Son and my God’.

****

Then **

Lord, have mercy ***(*x40*)***

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the blessings to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy.(

**x3**), Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

May God take pity on us. ****

And the Superior says the following

Prayer of Saint Basil the Great  

O God and Lord of powers, and Maker of all creation, who through the
compassion of your incomprehensible mercy sent down your only-begotten
Son, our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the salvation of our race,
and through his precious Cross tore up the record of our sins, and by it
triumphed over the principalities and powers of darkness; do you
yourself, O Master who loves mankind, accept also our supplications of
thanksgiving and entreaty; and deliver us from destroying and dark
transgression, and from all our foes, visible and invisible, who seek to
harm us. Nail down our flesh through fear of you, and do not let our
hearts incline to words or thoughts of evil, but wound our souls with
longing for you; that ever gazing upon you and guided by the light that
comes from you, seeing you the unapproachable and everlasting light, we
may give thanks to you, the Father without beginning, with your
only-begotten Son and your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. ****

According to the Typica of the Holy Mountain the Reader at once adds:

It is truly right to call you blessed, who gave birth to God,
ever-blessed and most pure, and Mother of our God. Greater in honour
than the Cherubim and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim,
without corruption you gave birth to God the Word; truly the Mother of
God, we magnify you.

## 

NINTH HOUR

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

3 Metanias, then the Psalms.

Psalm 68  

Save me, O God, for the waters have come up to my neck. I sink in deep
mire, where there is no foothold; I have come into deep waters, and the
flood sweeps over me. I am weary with my crying; my throat is parched.
My eyes grow dim with waiting for my God. More in number than the hairs
of my head are those who hate me without cause; many are those who would
destroy me, my enemies who accuse me falsely. What I did not steal must
I now restore? O God, you know my folly; the wrongs I have done are not
hidden from you. Do not let those who hope in you be put to shame
because of me, O Lord God of hosts; do not let those who seek you be
dishonoured because of me, O God of Israel. It is for your sake that I
have borne reproach, that shame has covered my face. I have become a
stranger to my kindred, an alien to my mother’s children. It is zeal for
your house that has consumed me; the insults of those who insult you
have fallen on me. When I humbled my soul with fasting, they insulted me
for doing so. When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became a byword to
them. I am the subject of gossip for those who sit in the gate, and the
drunkards make songs about me. But as for me, my prayer is to you, O
Lord. At an acceptable time, O God, in the abundance of your steadfast
love, answer me. With your faithful help rescue me from sinking in the
mire; let me be delivered from my enemies and from the deep waters. Do
not let the flood sweep over me, or the deep swallow me up, or the Pit
close its mouth over me. Answer me, O Lord, for your steadfast love is
good; according to your abundant mercy, turn to me. Do not hide your
face from your servant, for I am in distress: make haste to answer me.
Draw near to me, redeem me, set me free because of my enemies. You know
the insults I receive, and my shame and dishonour; my foes are all known
to you. Insults have broken my heart, so that I am in despair. I looked
for pity, but there was none; and for comforters, but I found none. They
gave me poison for food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink. Let their table be a trap for them, a snare for their allies. Let
their eyes be darkened so that they cannot see, and make their loins
tremble continually. Pour out your indignation upon them, and let your
burning anger overtake them. May their camp be a desolation; let no one
live in their tents. For they persecute those whom you have struck down,
and those whom you have wounded, they attack still more. Add guilt to
their guilt; may they have no acquittal from you. Let them be blotted
out of the book of the living; let them not be enrolled among the
righteous. But I am lowly and in pain; let your salvation, O God,
protect me. I will praise the name of God with a song; I will magnify
him with thanksgiving. This will please the Lord more than an ox or a
bull with horns and hoofs. Let the oppressed see it and be glad; you who
seek God, let your hearts revive. For the Lord hears the needy, and does
not despise his own that are in bonds. Let heaven and earth praise him,
the seas and everything that moves in them. For God will save Zion and
rebuild the cities of Juda; and his servants shall live there and
possess it; the children of his servants shall inherit it, and those who
love his name shall live in it. ****

Psalm 69  

O God, come to my help; Lord, hasten to help me. Let those who seek my
soul be shamed and confounded. Let those who wish me evil be turned back
and put to shame. Let those who say to me: ‘Fine, fine\!’ be turned back
immediately, ashamed. Let all who seek you, O God, be glad and rejoice
in you. Let all who love your salvation ever say: ‘The Lord be
magnified.’ But I am poor and needy; help me, O God. You are my helper
and my deliverer; Lord, do not delay. ****

Psalm 85  

Incline your ear, O Lord, and hear me, for I am poor and needy. Guard my
soul, for I am holy; O my God, save your servant who hopes in you. Have
mercy on me, O Lord, for I shall cry to you all the day; give joy to the
soul of your servant, for I have lifted up my soul to you. For you, O
Lord, are good and gentle, and full of mercy to all who call on you.
Give ear, O Lord, to my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
supplication. In the day of my trouble I called to you, for you heard
me. There is none like you among the gods, O Lord; none whose works are
as yours. All the nations whom you made will come and worship before
you, O Lord, and call upon your name. For you are great and do wondrous
things; you alone are God. Guide me, O Lord, in your way, and I shall
walk in your truth; make my heart glad to fear your name. I shall give
you thanks, O Lord, my God, with my whole heart; and I shall glorify
your name for ever. For your mercy is great towards me, and you have
delivered my soul from the lowest hell. O God, the lawless rose up
against me, and an assembly of mighty ones sought my soul, and did not
set you before them. And you, Lord, are pitying and merciful,
long-suffering and full of mercy and true. Look on me and have mercy on
me; give your might to your servant and save the son of your
maidservant. Make with me a sign for good, and let those who hate me see
it and be shamed; for you, Lord, have helped me and comforted me. ****

And again:

Make with me a sign for good, and let those who hate me see it and be
shamed; for you, Lord, have helped me and comforted me.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**)*,* Lord, have mercy (**x3**)*.*

Glory.

**Tone 8**

The Thief, seeing the Prince of life hanging on the Cross, said: If he
who is crucified with us was not God incarnate, the sun would not have
hidden its rays, nor would the shaken earth be quaking. But you who bear
all things, remember me, Lord, in your kingdom.

Both now.

**** Theotokion.**

O Good One, who was born of a Virgin for our sakes and endured
crucifixion; who despoiled death by death and as God revealed
resurrection, do not despise those whom you fashioned with your own
hand; show your love for mankind, O Merciful, accept the Mother of God
who bore you, as she intercedes for us, and save, O Saviour, a people in
despair.

****

Idiomels. Tone 7

A strange wonder it was to see the Maker of heaven and earth hanging on
a cross; the sun darkened, the day changed again into night and the
earth giving back the bodies of the dead from their tombs; with them we
worship you. Save us. (

**Twice, without a verse**) ****

Verse:

** They parted my garments among them, and cast lots for my clothing.
****

Tone 2

When the transgressors saw you, the Lord of glory, nailed to the Cross,
you cried out to them, ‘How have I grieved you? In what have I angered
you? Before me, who delivered you from affliction? And now how do your
repay me? With evils for blessings: instead of a pillar of fire, you
have nailed me to a cross; instead of a cloud, you have dug me a tomb;
instead of the manna, you have offered me gall; instead of water, you
have given me vinegar to drink. From now on I shall call the nations,
and they will glorify me with the Father and the holy Spirit’.

****

Verse:

** They gave me gall for food, and for my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink.

When the transgressors saw you, the Lord of glory, nailed to the Cross,
you cried out to them, ‘How have I grieved you? In what have I angered
you? Before me, who delivered you from affliction? And now how do your
repay me? With evils for blessings: instead of a pillar of fire, you
have nailed me to a cross; instead of a cloud, you have dug me a tomb;
instead of the manna, you have offered me gall; instead of water, you
have given me vinegar to drink. From now on I shall call the nations,
and they will glorify me with the Father and the holy Spirit.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 6**

To-day he is hung upon a tree, he who hung the earth upon the waters (

**x3**).  
He is arrayed in a crown of thorns, he who is the King of the Angels. He
is wrapped in mocking purple, he who wraps the heaven in clouds. He
receives a blow on the face, he who freed Adam in Jordan. He is
transfixed with nails, the Bridegroom of the Church. He is pierced by a
lance, the Son of the Virgin. We worship your Sufferings, O Christ
(**x3**).  
Show us also your glorious Resurrection.

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. \[

**Psalm 13**\]

The fool has said in his heart: \* ‘There is no God’.

****

Verse:

There is none who does good; no, not one.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Jeremias.  
\[

**11:18-12:5a.9b-11a.14-15**\]

Lord, make me know, and I shall know; then I saw their practices. But I,
like an innocent lamb led to be sacrificed, did not know; against me
they devised an evil thought, saying: Come, and let us cast wood into
his bread and let us wipe him out of the land of the living, and let his
name be remembered no more. Lord, you judge justly, you try reins and
hearts, may I see vengeance upon them from you, because I have revealed
to you my justification. Therefore thus says the Lord to the men of
Anathoth who seek for my life and who say: Do not prophesy in the name
of the Lord, otherwise you will die at our hands. See, I shall visit
them; their youths will die by the sword, their sons and daughters will
perish by hunger, and there will not be a remnant of them; because I
shall bring evils upon the inhabitants of Anathoth, in the year of their
visitation. \[*12:1*\] You are just, Lord, so I shall make my defence to
you, moreover I shall speak of judgements to you: why does the way of
the ungodly go well? Those who set breaches of faith at nothing have
prospered, you planted them and they have taken root; they begot
children and produced fruit; you are near to their mouth and far from
their reins. And you, Lord, know me, you have tried my heart before you;
purify them for the day of their slaughter. How long will the land
grieve and the grass of the field be dried from the wickedness of its
inhabitants? Animals and birds have vanished, because they \<the
inhabitants\> said: God will not see our ways. Your feet run and make
you faint. Assemble all the beasts of the field and let them come and
eat it. Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard, they have defiled my
portion, they have made my desired portion a trackless desert, it has
been made into utter destruction. Because thus says the Lord of all the
evil neighbours who touch my inheritance, which I have apportioned to my
people Israel: See, I shall drag them from their land and I shall cast
Juda out of their midst. And it shall be that after I have cast them
out, I shall turn back and have mercy on them, and I shall make them
dwell, each in his inheritance and each in his land.

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Hebrews.  
\[

**10:19-31**\]

Brethren, since we have confidence to enter the Holy Place by the blood
of Jesus, by the new and living way that he opened for us through the
curtain (that is, through his flesh), and since we have a great priest
over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart in full
assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil
conscience and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast to
the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who has promised is
faithful. And let us consider how to provoke one another to love and
good deeds, not neglecting to meet together, as is the habit of some,
but encouraging one another, and all the more as you see the Day
approaching. For if we wilfully persist in sin after having received the
knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins,
but a fearful prospect of judgement, and a fury of fire that will
consume the adversaries. Anyone who has violated the law of Moses dies
without mercy ‘on the testimony of two or three witnesses.’ How much
worse punishment do you think will be deserved by those who have spurned
the Son of God, profaned the blood of the covenant by which they were
sanctified, and outraged the Spirit of grace? For we know the one who
said, ‘Vengeance is mine, I will repay.’ And again, ‘The Lord will judge
his people.’ It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.

****

After the reading from the Apostle:

Priest:

** And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let
us pray to the Lord God. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to John. ****

Reader:

** Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you\!

\[

**19:23-37**\]

At that time, there stood by the Cross of Jesus his mother and his
mother’s sister, Mary wife of Clopas and Mary Magdalen. And Jesus,
seeing his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing beside him,
says to his mother, ‘Woman, behold your son.’ Then he says to the
disciple, ‘Behold your mother.’ And from that hour the disciple took her
to his own home. After this Jesus, knowing that all things had been
accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled says, ‘I thirst.’
Now there was a vessel there full of vinegar; so having filled a sponge
with vinegar and put in on a branch of hyssop they held it to his mouth.
So when Jesus had taken the vinegar he said, ‘It is accomplished’, and
bowing his head he gave up the spirit. The Jews then, so that the bodies
might not remain on the cross on the Sabbath, since it was Friday, the
day of Preparation (for that Sabbath was a solemn day), asked Pilate
that they might break their legs and that they might be removed. So the
soldiers came and broke the legs of the first and second who were
crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus as they saw that he was
already dead they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers with a
lance pierced his side, and at once there came out blood and water. And
he saw it has borne witness, and his witness is true. And he knows that
he speaks the truth, so that you too may believe. For these things
happened that the Scripture might be fulfilled, ** Not a bone of him
will be broken. ** And again another Scripture says, They will look an
the one they have pierced*.*

****

After the reading:

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\!

For your holy name*’*s sake do not finally reject us, do not annul your
covenant, do not take your mercy from us for the sake of Abraham, your
beloved, and for the sake of Isaac, your servant, and Israel, your holy
one.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (*three times*)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
not temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Kontakion

Come, let us all sing the praise of him who was crucified for us; for
Mary looked upon him on the Tree and said: ‘Though you endure the Cross,
yet you are my Son and my God’.

****

Then **

Lord, have mercy ***(*x40*)***

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, long-suffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the blessings to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy.(

**x3**), Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

May God take pity on us. ****

Prayer of Saint Basil the Great  

Master, Lord Jesus Christ, our God, who have long endured our
transgressions, and brought us to this hour in which hanging on the
life-giving tree you showed the good Thief the way into Paradise and
destroyed death by death, have mercy also on us sinners and your
unworthy servants. For we have sinned and trespassed and are not worthy
to raise our eyes and look on the height of heaven; because we have
abandoned the way of your justice and walked in the will of our hearts.
But we implore your unbounded goodness: spare us, O Lord, according to
the multitude of your mercy, and save us for your holy name’s sake, for
our days have been wasted in vanity. Rescue us from the hand of our
opponent, forgive us our sins, slay our carnal will, that we, having put
off the old man, may put on the new, and live for you, our Master and
benefactor; and that thus following your precepts we may reach eternal
rest, where those who rejoice have their dwelling. For you are the true
joy and gladness of those who love you, Christ our God, and to you we
give glory, together with your Father who has no beginning, and your
all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and always and to ages of
ages. Amen.

## 

TYPIKA

In your kingdom remember us, O Lord, when you come in your kingdom.  
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after justice, for they shall be
filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of
God.

Blessed are those who are persecuted for justice’s sake, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are you when men shall revile you and persecute you and say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.

Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Both now and for ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Remember us, O Lord, when you come in your kingdom.

Remember us, O Master, when you come in your kingdom.

Remember us, O Holy One, when you come in your kingdom.

The heavenly choir hymns you and says: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord Sabaoth,
heaven and earth are full of your glory.

****

Verse:

Come to him and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed.

The heavenly choir hymns you and says: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord Sabaoth,
heaven and earth are full of your glory.

Glory.

The choir of holy Angels and Archangels with all the heavenly Powers
hymns you and says: Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord Sabaoth, heaven and earth are
full of your glory.

Both now.

I believe in one God, Father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, of all
things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
from the Father before all ages. Light from Light, true God from true
God, begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father; through him all
things were made; for our sake and for our salvation came down from
heaven, and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and
became man; he was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, and
suffered and was buried; he rose again on the third day, in accordance
with the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven and is seated at the right
hand of the Father; he is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead; and his kingdom will have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life, who proceeds from
the Father, who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and
together glorified; who spoke through the Prophets. In one, Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church; I confess one Baptism for the forgiveness
of sins. I await the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to
come. Amen.

****

Then

Remit, forgive, pardon, O God, our offences, willing and unwilling, in
deed and in word, in knowledge and in ignorance, of the day and of the
night, in mind and in thought; pardon them all, as you are good and love
mankind.

****

Then

** Our Father. For yours. ****

Kontakion

Come, let us all sing the praise of him who was crucified for us; for
Mary looked upon him on the Tree and said: ‘Though you endure the Cross,
yet you are my Son and my God’.

****

Then:

Lord, have mercy. (**x40**).

All-holy Trinity, consubstantial Might, indivisible Kingship, Cause of
all blessings, be favourable even to me a sinner; strengthen and give
understanding to my heart and rid me of every defilement; enlighten my
mind, that I may ever glorify, praise, worship and say: One is Holy, one
is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen.

****

Reader:

It is truly right to call you blessed, who gave birth to God,
ever-blessed and most pure, and the Mother of our God. Greater in honour
than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim,
without corruption you gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of
God we magnify you. In the name of the Lord bless, Father.

Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.  
Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.  
Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for evermore.

Glory. Both now.

****

Psalm 33  

I will bless the Lord continually: his praise shall always be in my
mouth. Let my soul boast of the Lord: the humble shall hear it and
rejoice. O magnify the Lord with me: let us exalt his name together. For
I sought the Lord and he heard me: and he freed me from all my troubles.
Come to him and be enlightened: and your faces shall not be ashamed.
Here is a poor man who cried, and the Lord heard him: and saved him from
all his troubles. The angel of the Lord will encamp round those who fear
him: and deliver them. O taste and see that the Lord is good: blest the
man who hopes in him\! Fear the Lord, all you his holy ones: for those
who fear him never lack. The rich became poor and went hungry: but those
who seek the Lord lack nothing good. Come, my children, listen to me: I
will teach you the fear of the Lord. Who is there who wants life: loves
time to enjoy good things? Keep your tongue from evil: and your lips
from telling lies. Turn from evil and do good: seek peace and pursue it.
The eyes of the Lord are on the just: and his ears towards their cry.
The Lord sets his face against wrongdoers: to root out their memory from
the earth. The just cried and the Lord hears them: and freed them from
all their troubles. The Lord is close to those who are broken-hearted:
and will save the humble in spirit. The troubles of the just are many:
but the Lord will deliver them from them all. The Lord guards all their
bones: not one of them will be broken. The death of sinners is evil: and
those who hate the just man will be go astray. The Lord will deliver the
souls of his servants: and none who hope in him will go astray. ****

Reader:

** It is truly right to call you blessed, who gave birth to God,
ever-blessed and most pure, and the Mother of our God. Greater in honour
than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim,
without corruption you gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of
God we magnify you. In the name of the Lord bless, Father. ****

And the Dismissal.

Priest:

** May he who endured spittings, scourges, blows, the Cross and death
for the salvation of the world, Christ our true God, through the prayers
of his all-pure and holy Mother, by the power of the precious and
life-giving Cross, through the intercessions of the holy, glorious and
all-praised Apostles, \[of Saint **N. (to whom the Church is
dedicated)**, of Saint **N.**, whose memory we keep today,\] and of all
the Saints, have mercy on us and save us, for he is good and loves
humankind.

Through the prayers of our holy fathers, Lord Jesus Christ, our God,
have mercy upon us.

**People: Amen.**

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

