\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyFri.md) \] \[ [Matins](HWFri-M.md) \]
\[ [Royal Hours](HWFri-Hrs.md) \] \[ Vespers \]

# 

ON HOLY AND GREAT FRIDAY

## 

VESPERS

****

The priest gives the blessing:

Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and always, and to ages of ages.

****

The appointed monk or the Superior reads the Opening Psalm as follows:

Amen. Come let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King and
our God.

****

Psalm 103  

Bless the Lord, my soul\! O Lord my God, you have been greatly
magnified. You have clothed yourself with thanksgiving and majesty,
wrapping yourself in light as in a cloak, stretching out the heavens
like a curtain, roofing his upper chambers with waters, placing clouds
as his mount, walking on the wings of the wind, making spirits his
Angels and a flame of fire his Ministers, establishing the earth on its
sure base; it will not be moved to age on age. The deep, like a cloak,
is its mantle; waters will stand upon the mountains. At your rebuke they
will flee; they will quail at the voice of your thunder. The mountains
rise and the plains descend to the place which you established for them.
You fixed a limit that they will not pass, nor will they return to cover
the earth. You send out springs into the valleys; waters will run
between the mountains. They will give drink to all the beasts of the
field; the wild asses will await them to quench their thirst. Beside
them the birds of the air will make their dwelling: and sing among the
rocks. He waters the mountains from his upper chambers; the earth will
be filled from the fruit of your works. He makes grass spring up for the
cattle, and green herb for the service of mankind; to bring food out of
the earth, and wine makes glad the human heart; to make the face
cheerful with oil, and bread strengthens the human heart. The trees of
the plain will be satisfied, the cedars of Lebanon that you planted.
There the sparrows will build their nests; the heron’s dwelling is at
their head. The high mountains are for the deer; rocks a refuge for
hares. He made the moon to mark the seasons; the sun knew the hour of
its setting. You appointed darkness, and it was night, in which all the
beasts of the forest will prowl; young lions roaring to plunder and to
seek their food from God. The sun rose and they were gathered together
and they will lie down in their dens. Man will go out to his labour; and
to his labouring until evening. How your works have been magnified, O
Lord. With wisdom you have made them all, and the earth has been filled
with your creation. Also this great, wide sea; there there are creeping
things without number, living creatures small and great. There ships go
to and fro; this dragon which you fashioned to sport in it. All things
look to you to give them their food in due season. When you give it
them, they will gather it. When you open your hand **** all things will
be filled with goodness. But when you turn away your face they will be
troubled. You will take away their spirit, and they will perish and
return to their dust. You will send forth your spirit, and they will be
created, and you will renew the face of the earth. May the glory of the
Lord endure to the ages. The Lord will rejoice at his works. He looks
upon the earth and makes it tremble. He touches the mountains, and they
smoke. I will sing to the Lord while I live; I will praise my God while
I exist. May my words be pleasing to him. While as for me, I shall
rejoice in the Lord. O that sinners might perish from the earth, and the
wicked, so that they are no more. Bless the Lord, my soul\! ****

And again

The sun knew the hour of its setting: you made darkness, and it was
night. How your works have been magnified, O Lord. With wisdom you have
made them all\!

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.  
Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.  
Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God. (**x3)**

****

Litany of Peace

Priest:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And so after each petition.**

Priest:

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop

**N**., for the honoured order of presbyters, for the diaconate in
Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

\[For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

For our father and superior, Priest-monk

**N***.*, and all our brotherhood in Christ, let us pray to the Lord.\]

For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful
who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

At

Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Stichera in Tone1.**

Psalm 140  

\[**A**\] Lord, I have cried to you, hear me; hear me, O Lord. Lord, I
have cried to you, hear me. Give heed to the voice of my supplication
when I cry to you. Hear me, O Lord.

\[

**B**\] Let my prayer be directed like incense before you: the lifting
up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. Hear me, O Lord.

\[

**A**\] Set a guard, O Lord, on my mouth: and a strong door about my
lips.

\[

**B**\] Do not incline my heart to evil words: to make excuses for my
sins.

\[

**A**\] With those who work iniquity: let me not unite with their elect.

\[

**B**\] The just will chastise me with mercy and reprove me: but let not
the oil of sinners anoint my head.

\[

**A**\] For yet my prayer shall be in their pleasures: their judges have
been swallowed up near the rock.

\[

**B**\] They will hear my words for they are sweet: as a clod of earth
is crushed upon the ground their bones have been scattered at the mouth
of Hell.

\[

**A**\] For my eyes look to you, O Lord, my Lord: I have hoped in you,
do not take away my soul.

\[

**B**\] Keep me from the snare that they have hidden for me: and from
the traps of evil-doers.

\[

**A**\] The sinners will fall into their own net: I am alone until I
pass by. ****

Psalm 141

  
\[**B**\] With my voice I cried to the Lord: with my voice I entreated
the Lord.

\[

**A**\] I will pour out my entreaty before him: and tell him all my
trouble.

\[

**B**\] When my spirit was faint: you knew my path.

\[

**A**\] In the way where I walked: they had hidden a snare for me.

\[

**B**\] I looked to my right hand and saw: but there was none who knew
me.

\[

**A**\] Escape is gone from me: and there is none who seeks for my soul.

\[

**B**\] I cried to you, Lord, I said, ‘You are my hope: my portion in
the land of the living.’

\[

**A**\] Give heed to my supplication: for I am brought very low.

\[

**B**\] Deliver me from those who persecute me: for they are too strong
for me.

\[

**A**\] Bring my soul out of prison: that I may confess your name.

\[

**B**\] The just will await me: until you reward me. ****

Psalm 129

  
\[**A**\] Out of the depths I have cried to you, O Lord: Lord hear my
voice.

\[

**B**\] O let your ears be attentive: to the voice of my supplication.
****

6\.

If you, Lord, should mark iniquities: Lord, who will stand? But there is
forgiveness with you. ****

Tone 1

All creation was changed by fear when it saw you hanging on the Cross, O
Christ; the sun was darkened and the foundations of the earth were
shaken; all things were suffering with you, the Creator of them all. You
endured willingly for us. Lord, glory to you\!

****

5\.

For your name’s sake I have waited for you, O Lord: my soul has waited
on your word: my soul has hoped in the Lord.

All creation was changed by fear when it saw you hanging on the Cross, O
Christ; the sun was darkened and the foundations of the earth were
shaken; all things were suffering with you, the Creator of them all. You
endured willingly for us. Lord, glory to you\!

****

By Theophanes the Protothronos. Tone 2

4\.

From the morning watch until night, from the morning watch: let Israel
hope in the Lord.

Impious and lawless people, why do you meditate vain things? Why have
you condemned the life of all to death? O great marvel\! That the
Creator of the world, who loves humankind, is betrayed into the hand of
transgressors and lifted up on a tree, that he may free the prisoners in
Hell. Long-suffering Lord, glory to you\!

****

3\.

For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him plentiful redemption: and
he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Today the blameless Virgin, when she saw you hanging on the Cross, with
a mother’s love she lamented, bitterly wounded in her heart, groaning in
lamentation from the depth of her soul, she struck her cheeks and tore
her hair; and so, beating her breast, she cried out with grief, ‘Woe is
me, my divine child\! Woe is me, light of the world\! Why have you left
my sight, Lamb of God?’ Therefore the armies of the Bodiless Powers were
seized with terror as they said, ‘Lord, beyond understanding, glory to
you\!’

****

2\.

Praise the Lord, all you nations: praise him all you peoples.

When she saw you, O Christ, the Creator and God of all, hanging on the
Cross, she who bore you without seed, cried bitterly: My Son, where has
the beauty of your form departed? I cannot bear to see you unjustly
crucified; hasten then, arise, that I too may see your resurrection from
the dead on the third day.

****

Tone 2

1\.

For his mercy has been mighty towards us: and the truth of the Lord
endures to the ages.

Today the Master of creation stands before Pilate, and the Creator of
all things is given up to a Cross, led like a lamb by his own will. He
has been transfixed with the nails, and he has been pierced in the side,
and the lips of the One who rained down the manna are touched with a
sponge. The Redeemer of the world is struck on the cheeks, and the
Fashioner of all things is mocked by his own servants. O the Master’s
love for mankind\! For those who crucify him he implored his own Father,
saying, ‘Forgive them this sin, for they do not know, the lawless, how
wrongfully they act’.

Glory.

**** Tone 6**

Ah\! how did the lawless assembly condemn the King of creation to death,
without shame as they recalled benefits with which had protected them,
as he reminded them, saying, ‘My people, what I have done to you? Have I
not filled Judea with marvels? Have I not raised the dead with a word?
Have I not healed every sickness and disease? How then have you repaid
me? Why have you forgotten me, giving me blows for healings; putting me
to death in return for life; hanging your benefactor on a Tree as a
malefactor, the lawgiver as a lawbreaker, the King of all as one
condemned’. Long-suffering Lord, glory to you\!

Both now.

**** Same Tone**

A dread and marvellous mystery is seen to come to pass today. The
Invisible is grasped, the One who loosed Adam from the curse is bound,
the One who tries hearts and reins is tried; the One who shut the abyss
is shut up in prison. He, before whom the Powers of heaven stand in
fear, stands before Pilate; the Fashioner is struck by hand of the thing
he fashioned; he who judges the living and the dead, is condemned to a
Tree; the destroyer of Hell is shut up in a tomb. You bear all things
with compassion, and save all from the curse, long-suffering Lord, glory
to you\!

****

After the completion of the Verses, the Entrance with the Holy Gospel.

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright\! ****

We say

  
THE THANKSGIVING  
AT THE LIGHTING OF THE LAMPS  
**An ancient poem, or, as some say, by the martyr Athenogenes.**

O joyful light of the holy glory of the immortal, heavenly, holy,
blessed Father, O Jesus Christ. Now that we have come to the setting of
the sun and see the evening light, we sing the praise of God, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit. It is right at all times to hymn you with holy
voices, Son of God, giver of life: therefore the world glorifies you.

****

Priest:

Evening ****

Reader:

**Prokeimenon. Tone 4.**

They parted my garments among them, and \* cast lots for my clothing.

****

Verse:

O God, my God, why have you forsaken me? ****

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

** The Reading is from Exodus.

\[

**33:11-23**\] ****

Priest:

Let us attend. ****

Reader:

** Thus the Lord used to speak to Moses face to face, as one speaks to a
friend. Then he would return to the camp; but his servant, Jesus son of
Nun, would not leave the tent. Moses said to the Lord, ‘See, you have
said to me, ‘Bring up this people’; but you have not let me know whom
you will send with me. Yet you have said, ‘I know you by name, and you
have also found favour in my sight.’ Now if I have found favour in your
sight, show me your ways, so that I may know you and find favour in your
sight. Consider too that this nation is your people.’ He said, ‘My
presence will go with you, and I will give you rest.’ And he said to
him, ‘If your presence will not go, do not carry us up from here. For
how shall it be known that I have found favour in your sight, I and your
people, unless you go with us? In this way, we shall be distinct, I and
your people, from every people on the face of the earth.’ The Lord said
to Moses, ‘I will do the very thing that you have asked; for you have
found favour in my sight, and I know you by name.’ Moses said, ‘Show me
your glory, I pray.’ And he said, ‘I will make all my goodness pass
before you, and will proclaim before you the name, ‘The Lord’; and I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom
I will show mercy. But,’ he said, ‘you cannot see my face; for no one
shall see me and live.’ And the Lord continued, ‘See, there is a place
by me where you shall stand on the rock; and while my glory passes by I
will put you in a cleft of the rock, and I will cover you with my hand
until I have passed by; then I will take away my hand, and you shall see
my back; but my face shall not be seen.’ ****

After the reading:

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

Prokeimenon. Tone 4.

Give judgement, Lord, \* against those who wrong me.

****

Verse:

They have rewarded me with evils in return for blessings. ****

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

** The Reading is from Job.

\[

**42:12-17**\] ****

Priest:

Let us attend. ****

Reader:

** The Lord blessed the latter days of Job more than his beginning; and
he had fourteen thousand sheep, six thousand camels, a thousand yoke of
oxen, and a thousand donkeys. He also had seven sons and three
daughters. He named the first Day, the second Cassia, and the third Horn
of Amaltheia. In all the land there were no women so beautiful as Job’s
daughters; and their father gave them an inheritance along with their
brothers. After this Job lived one hundred and forty years, and saw his
children, and his children’s children, four generations. And Job died,
old and full of days. It is written that he will rise again with those
whom the Lord raises. He is described in the Syriac book as dwelling in
the land of Ausis, on the borders of Idumea and Arabia. His name before
was Jobab and he took an Arabian wife and begot a son named Enon. He
himself was the son of his father Zare, one of the sons of Esau. His
mother was Bosorra, so that was fifth in descent from Abraham. ****

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

** The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.

\[

**52:13-53:12**\] ****

Priest:

Let us attend. ****

Reader:

** Thus says the Lord: See, my servant will understand; he shall be
exalted and glorified exceedingly. Just as there many will be astonished
at you, so your appearance will be without glory from men, and your
glory from the sons of men. So many nations will marvel at him; kings
shall shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them about him
they shall see, and that which they had not heard they shall
contemplate. Who has believed what we have heard? And to whom has the
arm of the Lord been revealed? We brought a report as of a child before
him, as a root out of dry ground; he had no form or glory, and we saw
him, and he had neither form nor beauty. But his form was without honour
and inferior to the children of men. He was a man in suffering and
acquainted with bearing weakness, because his face has been away, he was
dishonoured and not esteemed. He bears our sins and is in pain for us.
We reckoned him to be in toil and in affliction and trouble. But he was
wounded for our sins and crushed for our iniquities; upon him was the
punishment of our peace, and by his bruises we are healed. All we like
sheep have gone astray; every one has gone astray in their own way, and
the Lord handed him over for our sins. And he, because of his
affliction, does not open his mouth; like a sheep he was led to the
slaughter, and like a lamb before its shearer is silent, so he does not
open his mouth. In his humiliation his judgement was taken away; who
shall declare his generation? for his life is taken away from the earth;
because of the iniquities of my people he was led to death. And I will
give the evil for his burial and the rich for his death, because he
practised no iniquity, nor was there guile in his mouth. And the Lord
wishes to cleanse him of his blow. If you give an offering for sin, your
soul will seed a long-lived descendence. And the Lord wishes to take
away from the toil of his soul, to show him light and to fashion him
with understanding, to justify the just one, who serves many well, and
he will bear their sins. Therefore he will inherit many and divide the
spoils of the strong. Because his soul was handed over to death, and was
numbered with the transgressors; and he bore the sin of many, and was
handed over because of their iniquities. Rejoice, barren one who do not
give birth, break out and cry, you who are not in labour, for the
children of the desolate are more than those of her that has a husband.
****

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

Prokeimenon. Tone 6. \[**Psalm 87**\]

They have placed me in the lowest pit; in darkness and in the shadow of
death.

****

Verse

*:* Lord God of my salvation, I called for help by day; and by night
also before you. ****

Priest:

Wisdom\! ****

Reader:

The reading is from the 1st Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.

\[

**1:18-2:2**\] ****

Priest

** Let us attend. ****

Reader:

** Brethren, the message about the cross is foolishness to those who are
perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. For it
is written, ‘I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the discernment
of the discerning I will thwart.’ Where is the one who is wise? Where is
the scribe? Where is the debater of this age? Has not God made foolish
the wisdom of the world? For since, in the wisdom of God, the world did
not know God through wisdom, God decided, through the foolishness of our
proclamation, to save those who believe. For Jews demand signs and
Greeks desire wisdom, but we proclaim Christ crucified, a stumbling
block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles, but to those who are the
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of
God. For God’s foolishness is wiser than human wisdom, and God’s
weakness is stronger than human strength. Consider your own call,
brothers and sisters: not many of you were wise by human standards, not
many were powerful, not many were of noble birth. But God chose what is
foolish in the world to shame the wise; God chose what is weak in the
world to shame the strong; God chose what is low and despised in the
world, things that are not, to reduce to nothing things that are, so
that no one might boast in the presence of God. He is the source of your
life in Christ Jesus, who became for us wisdom from God, and
righteousness and sanctification and redemption, in order that, as it is
written, ‘Let the one who boasts, boast in the Lord.’ When I came to
you, brothers and sisters, I did not come proclaiming the mystery of God
to you in lofty words or wisdom. For I decided to know nothing among you
except Jesus Christ, and him crucified. ****

At the end of the Apostle

Priest*:*

Peace to you. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Tone 5. \[

**Psalm 68**\] ****

Verse 1:

Save me, O God, for the waters have come in even to my soul. ****

Verse 2:

And they gave me gall for my food; and for my thirst they gave me
vinegar to drink. ****

Verse 3:

Let their eyes be darkened, so that they see not; and bow down their
back continually. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

The Reading is from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.

\[

**27:1-38, Lk. 23:39-43, Matt. 27:39-54, Joh. 19:31-37, Matt.
27:55-61**\]

At that time all the chief priests and the elders of the people took
counsel against Jesus, so as to put him to death. They bound him and led
him away and handed him over to Pontius Pilate, the governor. Then
Judas, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, repented and returned the
thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders, saying, ‘I have
sinned by betraying innocent blood.’ But they said, ‘What is that to us?
See to it yourself.’ And flinging down the pieces of silver in the
temple he went away and hanged himself. But the chief priests picked up
the pieces of silver and said, ‘It is not permitted to put them into the
treasury, because they are the price of blood.’ So they conferred
together and bought with them the potter’s field as a burial place for
foreigners. And so that field has been called ‘Field of Blood’ until
today. Then what had been said by the prophet Jeremy was fulfilled, when
he said, ‘And the took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of the one
who was prized, whom they prized from the children of Israel, and gave
them for the potter’s field, as the Lord had commanded me’. But Jesus
stood before the governor, and the governor questioned him saying, ‘Are
you the king of the Jews?’ Jesus said to him, ‘You say so.’ And when he
was accused by the chief priests and elders he made no answer. Then
Pilate says to him, ‘Do you not hear how many things they are testifying
against you?’ But he did not answer him with s single word, so that the
governor was greatly amazed. Now on the occasion of the feast the
governor was accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they
wished. They had at the time a notorious prisoner called Barabbas. So
when they had assembled Pilate said to them, ‘Whom do wish me to release
to you? Barabbas or Jesus called Christ?’ For he knew that they had
handed him over through envy. But while he was seated on the tribunal,
his wife sent to him saying, ‘Have nothing to do with that just man. For
I have suffered many things today in a dream because of him.’ But the
chief priests and elders had persuaded the crowds that they should ask
for Barabbas. Pilate says to them, ‘So what shall I do with Jesus called
Christ?’ They say to him, ‘Let him be crucified\!’ The governor said,
‘Why, what evil has he done?’ But they shouted even louder, saying,
‘Let him be crucified\!’ So Pilate, seeing that he was getting
nowhere, but that a riot was starting instead, took water and washed his
hands in full view of the crowd, saying, ‘I am innocent of the blood of
this just man. You look to it.’ And the whole people answered and said,
‘His blood be on us and on our children.’ Then he released Barabbas to
them, but Jesus he had scourged and handed him over to be crucified.
Then the governor’s soldiers took Jesus into the praetorium and gathered
the whole cohort round him. They stripped him and dressed him in a
scarlet cloak, and having woven a crown of thorns, they placed it on his
head and a reed in his right hand. Then they knelt in front of him and
mocked him, saying, ‘Hail, King of the Jews\!’ They spat on him and took
the reed and struck it on his head. And when they had mocked him, they
took off the cloak and dressed him in his own clothes and led him away
to crucify him. As they went out they found a Cyrenian named Simon; they
forced him to carry his cross. And they came to a place called Golgotha,
which means ‘place of a skull’, and they gave him vinegar to drink mixed
with gall. And when he had tasted it he would not drink. When they had
crucified him they divided his garments, casting lots, that saying by
the prophet might be fulfilled, ‘They divided my garments among
themselves, and cast lots for my raiment’. Then they sat down and
watched him there. And over his head they placed his charge, which ran,
‘This is Jesus, the king of the Jews.’ Then they crucified with him
two thieves, one on the right and one on the left. One of the criminals
hanging there blasphemed him, saying, ‘If you are the Christ, save
yourself and us.’ But the other answering, rebuked him and said, ‘Do you
have no fear of God, for you are subject to the same condemnation? And
we indeed justly; but he has done amiss.’ And he said to Jesus,
‘Remember me, Lord, when you come in your kingdom.’ And Jesus said to
him, ‘Amen I say to you, today you will be with me in Paradise.’ The
passers by blasphemed him, shaking their heads and saying, ‘You who
would destroy the temple and rebuild it in three days\! Save yourself.
If you are the son of God, come down from the cross.’ Likewise the chief
priests also mocked him with the scribes and elders and Pharisees,
saying, ‘He saved others; he cannot save himself. If he is king of
Israel, let him come down from the cross and we let us believe in him.
He trusted in God, let him now deliver him, if he wants him. For he
said, ‘I am the son of God.’’ The thieves too, who had been crucified
with him, reviled him in the same way. From the sixth hour there was
darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour. About the ninth hour
Jesus cried out with a loud voice and said, ‘Eli, Eli, lama
savachthani?’ That is, ‘My God, my God, why have you abandoned me?’
Some of those standing there when they heard said, ‘This one is calling
Elias.’ And one of them ran quickly and taking a sponge filled it with
vinegar, placed it on a reed and gave it him to drink. But the rest
said, ‘Wait, let us see if Elias is coming to save him.’ But Jesus,
having cried out again with a loud voice, gave up the spirit. And
behold, the veil of the temple was rent in two, from the top to the
bottom, and the earth was shaken and the rocks rent, and the graves were
opened and many bodies of the saints who slept were raised, and coming
out of their graves, after his rising they entered the holy city and
appeared to many. But the centurion and those with him watching Jesus,
when they saw the earthquake and all that was happening, were greatly
afraid and said, ‘Truly, this was the son of God.’ So the Jews, that the
bodies might not remain on the cross on the Sabbath, since it was the
preparation—for that day was a great Sabbath—, asked Pilate that their
legs might be broken and that they might be removed. So the soldiers
came and the broke the legs of the first and the other who was crucified
with him; but when they came to Jesus, as they saw that he was already
dead, they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers with a lance
pierced his side, and immediately there came out blood and water. And
the one who saw it has borne witness, and his witness is true, and he
knows that he speaks the truth, that you also may believe. For these
things took place that the scripture might be fulfilled, ‘Not a bone of
him will be broken’. And again another scripture says, ‘They will look
on him whom they pierced’. And there were many women there also watching
from a distance, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him. Among
whom were Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother of James and Joses and the
mother of the sons of Zebedee. When it grew late there came a rich man
from Arimathea named Joseph, who was himself also a disciple of Jesus.
He approached Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus. Then Pilate
ordered the body to be handed over. Joseph took the body, wrapped it in
clean linen and placed it in his own new grave, which he had hewn from
the rock. He rolled a great stone to the door of the grave and departed.
But Mary Magdalen was there and the other Mary, seated in front of the
tomb.

****

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you. ****

Priest:

Let us all say, with all our soul and with all our mind, let us say.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Lord almighty, the God of our fathers, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**Three times. And so after the remaining
petitions**) ****

Priest:

Also we pray for our Archbishop **N**.

\[Also we pray for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the royal
family, her government and all in authority.\]

Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation,
pardon and forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and
Orthodox Christians, those who dwell in or visit this city and parish,
the wardens and members of this church and their families; \[and for the
servants of God

**N. & N. (Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to pray)**,
and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy though we are.\]

Also we pray for the blessed and ever-remembered founders of this holy
church, and for all our departed brothers and sisters, Orthodox
believers, who have gone to their rest before us and who here and in all
the world lie asleep in the Lord; \[and for the servants of God

**N. & N. (Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to pray)**,
and that they may be pardoned all their offences, both voluntary and
involuntary.\]

Also we pray for those who bring offerings, those who care for the
beauty of this holy and venerable house, for those who labour in its
service, for those who sing, and for the people here present, who await
your great and rich mercy.

****

Priest:

For you, O God, are merciful and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

After the Litany say this prayer.

Grant, Lord, to keep us this evening without sin. Blessed are you, Lord,
the God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is your name to the
ages. Amen.  
Let your mercy, Lord be upon us, as we have hoped in you.  
Blessed are you, Lord: teach me your statutes.  
Blessed are you, Master: make me understand your statutes.  
Blessed are you, Holy One: enlighten me with your statutes.  
Lord, your mercy is for ever; do not scorn the work of your hands. To
you praise is due, to you song is due, to you glory is due, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Priest:

Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**And so after each of the following petitions**)
****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.

That the whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let
us ask of the Lord.

****

People:

Grant this, O Lord. (**And so after each of the following petitions**)
****

Priest:

An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies,
let us ask of the Lord.

Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.

Things good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let
us ask of the Lord.

That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let
us ask of the Lord.

A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a
good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

** For you, O God, are good and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest (blessing the People):

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest, in a low voice, says the:

Prayer at the Bowing of Heads

Lord our God, who bowed the heavens and came down for the salvation of
the human race, look upon your servants and upon your inheritance, for
to you, the fearful Judge who love mankind, your servants have bowed
their heads and inclined their necks, not waiting for any human help,
but awaiting your mercy and looking for your salvation. Guard them at
every moment, during both the present evening and the approaching night,
from every foe, from every hostile operation of the devil and from vain
thoughts and evil desires.

****

(Aloud) ****

Blessed and glorified be the might of your kingdom, of the Father and of
the Son and of the holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages. ****

People**:**

Amen. ****

Then the Aposticha.

During the Aposticha the takes place the solemn procession from the
Sanctuary of the Winding Sheet

\[**Epitaphion**\]**, which is placed on the bier in the middle of the
Church.**

Tone 2. Model Melody.

When from the Tree the Arimathean took you down as a dead body, O
Christ, who are the life of all, he buried you, with myrrh and a shroud;
and with love he embraced your immaculate body with heart and lips; yet,
shrouded with fear, he cried out to you rejoicing, ‘Glory to your
condescension, Lover of humankind\!’

****

Verse 1:

** The Lord is King, he has robed himself with majesty. The Lord has
robed, and girded himself with power.

When in the new tomb you, the Redeemer of all, had been laid for the
sake of all, Hell became a laughing stock and, seeing you, quaked with
fear; the bars were smashed, the gates were shattered, the graves were
opened, the dead arose; then Adam with thanksgiving cried out to you
rejoicing, ‘Glory to your condescension, Lover of humankind\!’

****

Verse 2:

** He has made the world firm; it will not be shaken.

When in the tomb in the flesh you were enclosed by your own will, O
Christ, who by the nature of your godhead are uncircumscribed and
unbounded, you unlocked the storehouses of Hell and emptied all his
palaces; then too you granted this Sabbath divine blessing and glory and
your own splendour.

****

Verse 3:

Holiness becomes your house, O Lord, for ever.

When the Powers saw you, O Christ, falsely accused by lawless men as a
deceiver, they trembled at your ineffable long-suffering, and at the
gravestone, sealed by the hands with which they had speared your
immaculate side; yet rejoicing at our salvation, they cried to you,
‘Glory to your condescension, Lover of humankind\!’

Glory. Both now.

**** Tone 5**

When Joseph with Nikodemos took you, who are clothed with light as a
garment, down from the Tree, and saw you a dead body, naked, unburied,
he was filled with compassion, and raising a lament he grieved and said,
‘Alas, sweetest Jesu, when a little while ago the sun saw you hanging on
the Cross, it wrapped itself in gloom, and the earth quaked with fear,
and the veil of the temple was rent in two; but see, I now look on you,
who for me have willingly undergone death; how shall I bury you, my God?
Or how shall I wrap you in shrouds; with what hands shall I touch your
immaculate body? Or what songs shall I sing at your departure? I magnify
your sufferings and I hymn your burial, with your resurrection, as I
cry: Lord, glory to you\!’

****

On the completion of the Aposticha, we say the  

Song of Symeon who Received God **(Luke 2,29)**

Now, Master, you let your servant depart in peace, according to your
word; For my eyes have seen your salvation, which you have prepared
before the face of all peoples, a light to bring revelation to the
nations, and the glory of your people Israel.

****

Reader:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three
times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake.

Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come,
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen. ****

Then the following Apolytikia  
Tone 2.

The noble Joseph, taking down your most pure Body from the Tree, wrapped
it in a clean shroud with sweet spices and laid it for burial in a new
grave.

****

The same Tone.

The Angel standing by the grave cried to the women bearing myrrh: Myrrh
is fitting for the dead, but Christ has shown himself a stranger to
corruption.

****

Priest:

Wisdom. ****

Reader:

Bless. ****

Priest (from inside the Sanctuary):

Blessed is He Who Is, Christ our true God, always, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen. May the Lord God strengthen the holy and pure faith of devout
and orthodox Christians, with his holy Church \[and this sacred
Monastery\], unto ages of ages. ****

Priest:

Most holy Mother of God, save us. ****

Reader:

**** Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more
glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you gave birth to God the
Word; truly the Mother of God, we magnify you. ****

The Priest, standing in the holy Doors and facing the People, gives the
Great Dismissal as follows:

Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you.

****

Reader:

Glory. Both now. Lord, have mercy **(x3)***.* Give the blessing. ****

And the Priest, lowering the Phelonion, continues:

May he who for our sake and for our salvation accepted the fearful
sufferings and the life-giving Cross and the voluntary Burial in the
flesh, Christ our true God, through the prayers of his all-pure and holy
Mother, by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross, through the
intercessions of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles, \[of Saint

**N. (to whom the Church is dedicated*)***, of Saint **N**., whose
memory we keep today,\] and of all the Saints, have mercy on us and save
us, for he is good and loves mankind. ****

Turning to the East he says,

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us.

****

People:

****** Amen.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

