\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyMon.md) \] \[ Matins \]
\[ [First Hour](HWHrs01.md) \] \[ [Hours and Typika](HWHrsTyp.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](HWMon-V.md) \]

# HOLY AND GREAT MONDAY

**The Midnight Office is read in the Church** \[**and not, as usually on
weekdays, in the Narthex, or Liti**\] **as during Great Lent.**

## AT MATINS

**After the Dismissal of the Midnight Office the Priest, having made the
customary metania to the Superior, or to his stall, enters the sanctuary
and makes three bows before the holy Table. He puts on the Epitrachelion
and, standing in front of the holy Table, intones:**  
Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

**Reader:** Amen.

**The Priest blesses the incense and begins to cense the sanctuary and
the whole church as usual.**

**The Reader begins:**  
Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three times)**

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

**Priest:** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages.

**Reader:** Amen.

Lord, have mercy (**x12**). Glory. Both now.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

**With three metanias. Then the following two Psalms.**

**Psalm 19**  
May the Lord hear you in the day of trouble; may the name of the God of
Jacob shield you. May he send you his help from the holy place, and
support you from Sion. May he remember your every sacrifice, and accept
with favour your whole burnt offering. May the Lord give you your
heart’s desire, and fulfil your every purpose. We shall rejoice in
your salvation, and be magnified in the name of our the Lord our God.
May the Lord fulfil all your petitions. Now I know that the Lord has
saved his Christ. He will hear him from his holy heaven; in mighty acts
is the salvation of his right hand. Some put their trust in chariots and
some in horses, but we will call on the name of the Lord our God. They
were fettered and fell, but we have risen and been set upright. Lord,
save the king, and hear us on the day we call upon you.

**Psalm 20**  
The king will rejoice in your power, O Lord, he will exult exceedingly
in your salvation. You gave him his heart’s desire; you did not deny him
the request of his lips. For you came to meet him with blessings of
goodness; you placed a crown of precious stones upon his head. He asked
you for life, and you gave him length of days for age on age. Great is
his glory because of your salvation; you will place on him glory and
majesty. For you will give him blessing for age on age, and make him
glad with the joy of your countenance. For the king puts his hope in the
Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be shaken. May
your hand light upon all your enemies, and your right hand find out all
who hate you. You will make them like a blazing oven at the time of your
presence. The Lord will confound them in his wrath and fire will devour
them. You will destroy their offspring from the earth, and their seed
from among the children of humankind. Because they intended evils
against you, and devised plans by which they can in no way succeed. For
you will put them to flight; among your remnants you will prepare their
presence. Be exalted, Lord, in your power; we will sing and praise your
mighty acts.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

**Priest:** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages.

**The priest must take care that he is standing beneath the Polyeleos to
say this conclusion. He then enters the sanctuary, puts away the censer
and takes his stand in front of the Holy Table.**

**Reader:** Amen.

**And the following Troparia:**

Lord, save your people, and bless your inheritance, granting your
faithful people victory over their enemies, and guarding your
commonwealth by your Cross.

Glory.

Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, grant you mercies, Christ God,
to the new commonwealth called by your name. Make your faithful people
glad by your power, giving them victory over their enemies. May they
have your help in battle, a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.

Both now. **Theotokion.**

Dread Champion that cannot be put to shame, do not despise our
petitions, O Good One. All-praised Mother of God establish the
commonwealth of the Orthodox, save your people and give them victory
from heaven, for you gave birth to God, O only blessed one.

**Priest:** Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy. We
pray you, hear and have mercy.

**Reader:** Lord have mercy (**x3).**

**Priest:** For you, O God, are merciful, and love humankind, and to you
we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for
ever and to the ages of ages.

**Reader:** Amen. In the name of the Lord, give the blessing, Father.

**Priest:** Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided
Trinity, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

**Reader:** Amen.

THE SIX PSALMS

****

And we begin the Six Psalms, listening with complete silence and
compunction. The Superior, or the designated reader, with devotion and
fear of God says:

Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth, goodwill among men
(**x3).**  
Lord, you will open my lips: and my mouth will declare your praise
(**x2).**

**Psalm 3**  
Lord, why have those who afflict me been multiplied? Many rise against
me. Many say to my soul, ‘There is no salvation for him in his God’. But
you, Lord, are my helper, my glory, and the one who lifts up my head.
With my voice, I cried to the Lord, and he heard me from his holy
mountain. I lay down and slept; I awoke, because the Lord will assist
me. I will not be afraid of tens of thousands of people who surround me.
Rise, Lord, save me, my God; because you have struck all who are vainly
my foes. You have smashed the teeth of sinners. Salvation is the Lord’s,
and your blessing is upon your people.

****

And again:

I lay down and slept; I awoke because the Lord will assist me.

**Psalm 37**  
Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger, nor chastise me in your wrath. For
your arrows have been stuck fast in me, and you have laid a heavy hand
upon me. There is no healing in my flesh on account of your wrath, nor
peace in my bones on account of my sins. My iniquities flooded over my
head; like a heavy burden they weighed heavily upon me. My wounds stank
and festered on account of my foolishness. I was wretched and utterly
bowed down; I went about mourning all day long. For my loins were filled
with mockings, and there is no healing in my flesh. I was maltreated and
humiliated exceedingly; I howled from the groaning of my heart. Lord,
all my desire is before you, and my groaning was not hidden from you. My
heart was troubled, my strength failed me; and even the light of my eyes
had gone from me. My friends and my neighbours drew near and stood
against me, and those nearest me stood far away. Those who sought my
life used force, and those who sought evils for me spoke vanities, and
meditated trickeries all day long. But I, like a deaf man, heard
nothing; like one who is dumb, who does not open his mouth. So I became
like one who cannot hear, and in whose mouth there are no rebukes. For
in you, Lord, I have hoped; you will answer me, O Lord my God. For I
said: Let my foes never exult over me. When my foot slipped they crowed
over me. For I am ready for blows and my pain is with me continually.
For I will declare my iniquity and be troubled at my sin. But my enemies
live and have prevailed over me, and those who hate me unjustly have
been multiplied. Those who repay me with evils in place of good have
slandered me, since I pursued goodness. Do not forsake me, Lord; my God,
do not go far from me. Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation.

****

And again.

Do not forsake me, Lord; my God do not go far from me.  
Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation.

**Psalm 62**  
O God, my God, I watch for you at dawn; my soul has thirsted for you, my
flesh how often in a desert, untrodden and waterless land. Thus I
appeared before you in the holy place, to see your power and your glory.
For your mercy is better than life; my lips will praise you. So I will
bless you as long as I live, and in your name I will lift up my hands.
May my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness; my mouth will praise
you with joyful lips. When I remembered you upon my bed, every dawn I
meditated upon you. For you became my helper, and in the shelter of your
wings I shall rejoice. My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld
me. But those who vainly sought my life will go down to the deepest
parts of the earth, they will be delivered to the power of the sword,
they will be portions for foxes. But the king will rejoice in God, and
all who swear by him will be praised; for the mouths of those who speak
iniquities have been stopped.

****

And again.

Every dawn I meditated upon you, for you became my helper, and in the
shelter of your wings I shall rejoice.  
My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld me.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (**x3, without
Metanias). Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy.**

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

**Psalm 87**  
Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day, and by night also before
you. Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn you ear to my
supplication. For my soul was filled with evils, and my life drew near
to Hell. I was reckoned among those that go down to the Pit; I became as
one that has no help, free among the dead. Like the slain that sleep in
the tomb, whom you remembered no more; and they were cut off from your
power. They placed me in the lowest Pit; in darkness and in the shadow
of death. Your wrath lay heavy upon me, and you brought all your waves
against me. You put my friends far from me, and made me an abomination
to them. I was handed over and I came out; my eyes grew weak because of
my beggary. I cried to you, Lord, all the day; I stretched out my hands
towards you. Will you work wonders for the dead; or will physicians
raise them up again to praise you? Will any declare your mercy in the
tomb, or your truth in the place of destruction? Will your wonders be
known in the dark, or your justice in a land that has been forgotten?
But to you, Lord, I have cried, and in the morning my prayer will come
before you. Why have you rejected my soul, Lord; why do you turn away
your face from me? I am poor and in toils since my youth; exalted, I was
humbled and brought to despair. Your fierce anger overwhelmed me, and
your terrors appalled me. They surrounded me like water all day long;
they closed in upon me from every side. Friend and neighbour you have
put far from me, and my companions because of my misery.

****

And again.

Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day; and by night also before
you.  
Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn your ear to my
supplication.

****

The priest comes from the Altar and reads the morning prayers quietly.

**Psalm 102**  
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget none of his benefits. He
forgives all your iniquities; he heals all your diseases; he redeems
your life from corruption and crowns you with mercy and compassion; he
satisfies your desire with good things; your youth will be renewed like
an eagle’s. The Lord performs deeds of mercy and judgement for all who
are oppressed. He made known his ways to Moses, his wishes to the
children of Israel. The Lord is compassionate and merciful,
long-suffering and full of mercy. He will not always be wrathful, nor
will he be enraged for ever. He has not dealt with us according to our
iniquities, nor rewarded us according to our sins. For, like the height
of heaven above the earth, the Lord has made his mercy prevail over
those that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far has he
taken our sins from us. As a father takes pity on his children the Lord
has taken pity on those who fear him. For he knows of what we are made;
has remembered that we are but dust. As for man, his days are but as
grass, he will blossom like a flower of the field; for when a wind has
passed over it, it will be no more and will know its place no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon those who fear him;
and his justice upon their children’s children, upon those who keep his
covenant and remember his commandments to do them. The Lord has prepared
his throne in heaven and his kingdom rules over all. Bless the Lord, all
you his Angels, powerful in strength, who perform his word, and listen
to the voice of his words. Bless the Lord, all you his Powers, his
Ministers who do his will. Bless the Lord, all you his works. In every
place of his dominion, bless the Lord, O my soul\!

****

And again.

In every place of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul\!

**Psalm 142**  
Lord, hear my prayer: in your truth give ear to my supplication, and in
your justice hear me. Do not enter into judgement with your servant: for
in your sight no one living can be justified. For the enemy pursued my
soul, humbled my life to the ground. Made me dwell in darkness, like
those for ever dead. My spirit grew despondent within me and my heart
within me was troubled. I remembered days of old, I meditated on all
your works: I made the works of your hands my meditation. I stretched
out my hands towards you: my soul thirsted for you like a waterless
land. Hear me swiftly, O Lord, my spirit has failed. Do not turn your
face from me, or I shall be like those who go down to the Pit. Make me
hear of your mercy in the morning, for I have hoped in you. Make known
to me the way in which I should walk, for to you I have lifted up my
soul. Deliver me from my enemies, Lord: I have run to you for shelter.
Teach me to do your will, for you are my God. Your good Spirit will
guide me in an upright land. For your name’s sake, O Lord, you will give
me life. In your justice, you will bring my soul out of trouble, in your
mercy slay my enemies, and destroy all those that afflict my soul, for I
am your servant.

****

And again.

In your justice hear me, O Lord, and do not enter into judgement with
your servant. (**x2)**

Your good Spirit will guide me in an upright land.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

Amen. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (**x3).**
**Metanias (x3)**

****

Then the Litany by the Priest, outside the Sanctuary.

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

**People: Lord, have mercy.** **And so after each petition.**

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.  
For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.  
For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.  
For our Archbishop **N., for the honoured order of presbyters, for the
diaconate in Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to
the Lord.**  
\[For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.  
For our Father and Abbot Priest-monk **N. and for all our brotherhood in
Christ, let us pray to the Lord.\]**  
For this city\[holy monastery\], for every, city, town and village, and
for the faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.  
For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.  
For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.  
For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.  
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.  
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

**People: To you, O Lord.**

**Priest: For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages.**

**People: Amen.**

**We sing Alleluia** **3 times in the 8th Tone, saying first one of the
following verses.**

**Verse 1. From nightfall my spirit is awake for you, O God, for your
commands are light upon the earth.**

**Verse 2. Learn justice, inhabitants of the earth.**

**Verse 3. Jealousy will seize an untaught people, and now fire devours
their adversaries.**

**Verse 4. Bring evils upon them, O Lord, bring evils upon them, the
glorious ones of the earth.**

****

Then the following Troparion is sung solemnly 3 times.  
Tone 8

Behold, the Bridegroom comes in the middle of the night, and blessed is
that servant whom he finds watching; but unworthy is the one whom he
finds slothful. Take care then, my soul, not to be overcome with sleep,
lest you be given up to death, and be shut out of the kingdom; but rouse
yourself and cry: Holy, holy, holy are you, O God; through the
protection of Bodiless Powers, have mercy on us.

Glory.

Behold, the Bridegroom comes in the middle of the night, and blessed is
that servant whom he finds watching; but unworthy is the one whom he
finds slothful. Take care then, my soul, not to be overcome with sleep,
lest you be given up to death, and be shut out of the kingdom; but rouse
yourself and cry: Holy, holy, holy are you, O God; through the prayers
of the \[**here we mention the category of the Patron of the Church,
Apostle, Hierarch, Martyr** **etc\], have mercy on us.**

Both now.

Behold, the Bridegroom comes in the middle of the night, and blessed is
that servant whom he finds watching; but unworthy is the one whom he
finds slothful. Take care then, my soul, not to be overcome with sleep,
lest you be given up to death, and be shut out of the kingdom; but rouse
yourself and cry: Holy, holy, holy are you, O God; through the Mother of
God, have mercy on us.

\[**According to the Russian Typikon the ending is the same each time:
through the Mother of God have mercy on us.** **The modern Greek books
place a small Litany here, with the ekphonesis, For yours is the
might…\]**

****

Then we recite Kathisma 4 \[Psalms 24-31\] of the Psalter. After the
Psalter the following Kathisma:

Tone 1. The soldiers watching

The present day makes the holy sufferings dawn for the world like saving
lights; for Christ in his goodness is hastening to suffer; he who holds
the universe in the hollow of his hand accepts to be hung upon a Tree to
save humankind.

Glory. Both now.

The present day makes the holy sufferings dawn for the world like saving
lights; for Christ in his goodness is hastening to suffer; he who holds
the universe in the hollow of his hand accepts to be hung upon a Tree to
save humankind.

****

Then Kathisma 5 \[Psalms 32-36\] of the Psalter is read, and after it
the following Kathisma to the same melody.

Tone 1. The soldiers watching

Invisible Judge, how have you been made visible in flesh and are coming
to be slain by lawless men, so condemning our condemnation by your
passion. Therefore with one accord, O Word, we offer praise, majesty and
glory to your authority.

Glory. Both now.

Invisible Judge, how have you been made visible in flesh and are coming
to be slain by lawless men, so condemning our condemnation by your
passion. Therefore with one accord, O Word, we offer praise, majesty and
glory to your authority.

****

Then Kathisma 6 \[Psalms 37-45\] of the Psalter is read, and after it
the following Kathisma:

Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

The present day is resplendent with the first fruits of the Lord’s
sufferings. Come then, lovers of feasts, let us meet it with songs; for
the Creator is coming to accept Cross, afflictions and scourges, as he
is judged by Pilate; therefore too, struck on the face by a slave, he
endures all that he may save humankind. And so let us cry aloud to him:
Lover of humankind, Christ our God, grant forgiveness of offences to
those who with faith worship your most pure sufferings.

Glory. Both now.

The present day is resplendent with the first fruits of the Lord’s
sufferings. Come then, lovers of feasts, let us meet it with songs; for
the Creator is coming to accept Cross, afflictions and scourges, as he
is judged by Pilate; therefore too, struck on the face by a slave, he
endures all that he may save humankind. And so let us cry aloud to him:
Lover of humankind, Christ God, grant forgiveness of offences to those
who with faith worship your most pure sufferings.

\[**The Russian Typikon prescribes three readings, one after each
Kathisma, from St John Chrysostom’s commentary on St Matthew’s Gospel,
without specifying the references precisely.**\]

**And at once the Priest says:**  
And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let us
pray to the Lord God.

**Reader: Lord, have mercy, Lord, have mercy, Lord, have mercy.**

**Priest: Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace
to all.**

**Reader: And to your Spirit.**

**Priest: The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Matthew.**

**Reader: Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\!**

**Priest: Let us attend.**

\[**21:18-43\]**

At that time, as Jesus was going back to the city, he was hungry. And
seeing a fig tree by the road, he went up to it, and found nothing on
it, but only leaves. And he said to it, ‘May fruit no longer come from
you for ever.’ And at once the fig tree was withered. When they saw it,
the disciples marvelled and said, ‘How was the fig tree withered at
once?’ But Jesus answered and said to them, ‘Amen, I say to you, if you
have faith and do not hesitate, not only will you do this to the fig
tree, but even if you say to this mountain, ‘Be lifted up and cast into
the sea’, it will be done. And everything you ask for in prayer with
faith you will receive.’ And when he came to the temple precinct the
chief priests and elders of the people came to him as he was teaching
and said, ‘By what authority are you doing these things, and who gave
you this authority?’ Jesus answered and said to them, ‘I shall also ask
you one question, and if you answer me, I shall also tell you by what
authority I do these things. John’s baptism, where was it from, from
heaven or from humans?’ They discussed this among themselves and said,
‘If we say ‘from heaven’, he will say to us, ‘Then why did you not
believe him?’. But if we same ‘from humans’, we are afraid of the crowd,
for all hold John to be a prophet.’ So they answered Jesus and said, ‘We
do not know.’ And he said to them, ‘Nor shall I tell you by what
authority I do these things. What is your opinion? A man had two sons,
and he approached the first and said to him, ‘My son, go and work in my
vineyard today’. He answered, ‘I do not wish to’. But later he changed
his mind and went. And he approached the second and said the same to
him. But he answered, ‘Yes, sir’. And he did not go. Which of the two
did the will father’s will?’ They said to him, ‘The first.’ Jesus said
to them, ‘Amen, I say to you. The publicans and harlots are going ahead
of you into the kingdom of God. For John came to you in the way of
justice, and you did not believe him. But the publicans and harlots
believed him. But even when you saw, you did not later change your minds
and believe him. Hear this parable. There was a landowner who planted a
vineyard and put a hedge round it and dug a wine press in it and built a
tower. Then he let it out to tenant farmers and went abroad. When the
time of the vintage drew near, his sent his slaves to the farmers to
collect his produce. But the farmers seized his slaves and one they
flogged, one they killed and one they stoned. Once again he sent other
slaves, more than at first, and they treated them the same way.
Afterwards he sent his son to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son’.
But when the farmers saw the son they said among themselves, ‘This is
the heir. Come, let us kill him and obtain his inheritance’. And they
took him and cast him outside the vineyard and killed him. So when the
lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?’ They said
to him, ‘He will bring those evil men to an evil end. And he will hire
out the vineyard to other farmers, who will return his produce to him at
the proper times.’ Jesus said to them, ‘Did you never read in the
scriptures, ‘The stone that the builders rejected has become the head of
the corner. This is the Lord’s doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes’?
Therefore I tell you, the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you and
given to a nation that will produce its fruits’.

**Reader: Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\!**

**And at once:**  
**Psalm 50**  
Have mercy on me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy. According
to the multitude of your compassion blot out my offence. Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I
acknowledge my wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. Against you
alone I have sinned and done what is evil in your sight, that you may be
justified in your words and win when you are judged. For see, in
wickedness I was conceived and in sin my mother bore me. For see, you
have loved truth; you have shown me the hidden and secret things of your
wisdom. You will sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be cleansed. You
will wash me and I shall be made whiter than snow. You will make me hear
of joy and gladness; the bones which have been humbled will rejoice.
Turn away your face from my sins and blot out all my iniquities. Create
a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Do not
cast me out from your presence, and do not take your Holy Spirit from
me. Give me back the joy of your salvation, and establish me with your
sovereign Spirit. I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will
turn to you again. O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from
bloodshed and my tongue will rejoice at your justice. Lord, you will
open my lips, and my mouth will proclaim your praise. For if you had
wanted a sacrifice, I would have given it. You will not take pleasure in
burnt offerings. A sacrifice to God is a broken spirit; a broken and a
humbled heart God will not despise. Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good
pleasure; and let the walls of Jerusalem be rebuilt. Then you will be
well pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, oblation and whole burnt
offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar.

**We begin the Canon by St Kosmas, of which the Acrostic is:  
On Monday**

****

In each Ode the Irmos is sung twice, and the troparia are repeated to
make 12. The Irmos is repeated as Katavasia.

Ode 1. Tone 2. Irmos.

‘Let us sing to the Lord, who by his divine command dried up the
pathless, raging sea, and through it guided the people of Israel to
march on foot, for he has been greatly glorified.’

****

Troparia

Ineffable the condescension of God’s Word, for Christ himself, being
both God and man, and not considering his being God as something to be
grasped, showed this to his disciples by being formed as a slave; for he
has been greatly glorified.

Myself rich in godhead, I have come to serve Adam who has become poor,
whose form I, the Creator, have willingly put on, and to lay down my
life as a ransom for his, I who am impassible in my godhead.

****

Katavasia

Let us sing to the Lord, who by his divine command dried up the
pathless, raging sea, and through it guided the people of Israel to
march on foot, for he has been greatly glorified.

**Priest: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.**

**Reader: Lord, have mercy.**

**Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your
grace.**

**Reader: Lord, have mercy.**

**Priest: Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the
Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to
Christ our God.**

**Reader: To you, O Lord.**

**Priest: For you are the King of peace and the Saviour of our souls,
and to you we give glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever
and to the ages of ages.**

**Reader: Amen.**

****

After the small litany the Kontakion  
Tone 8.

Jacob lamented the loss of Joseph, yet the noble one was seated in a
chariot, honoured like a king; for as he had not been slave to the
pleasures of the Egyptian woman, he was glorified in return by the one
who sees the hearts of men, and bestows an incorruptible crown.

****

The Ikos

Let us now add a lament to his lament and let us shed tears, with Jacob
weeping for the revered and temperate Joseph, who though enslaved in
body, guarded his soul unenslaved, and became lord of all Egypt; for God
grants to his servants an incorruptible crown.

****

The Menologion of the day and then the following notice:

On holy and great Monday we commemorate the blessed and most virtuous
Joseph, and the fig tree which was cursed by the Lord and withered.

**Verses on the most virtuous Joseph.  
Chaste Joseph a just ruler was revealed,**  
And furnisher of corn: O wealth of virtues\!

**Others on the withered fig-tree.**  
A fig tree to the Hebrews’ congregation  
Devoid of spiritual fruits Christ here compares,  
And cursing withers: let us flee its passion.

At the prayers of the all-virtuous Joseph, Christ God, have mercy on us.
Amen.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

‘The unwearied fire, fed with unlimited fuel, shuddered at the bodies of
the shining youths, like their souls undefiled; while as the ever-living
flame withered away, an everlasting hymn was sung: All you his works,
praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages.’

****

Troparia

‘Then all will know that you are my disciples, if you keep my
commandments’, says the Saviour to his friends, as he goes to his
passion. ‘Be at peace with one another and with all; think humble
thoughts and so be exalted; and, acknowledging me as Lord, praise and
highly exalt me to all the ages’.

‘Let might over your fellows be for you the opposite of the order of the
nations; their self-chosen will is not my lot, but tyranny. The one
among you then who wishes to be leader of the rest, let him be the last
of all; and acknowledging me as Lord, praise and highly exalt me to all
the ages’.

****

Katavasia

The unwearied fire, fed with unlimited fuel, shuddered at the bodies of
the shining youths, like their souls undefiled; while as the ever-living
flame withered away, an everlasting hymn was sung: All you his works,
praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

The Magnificat is not sung, but instead the 9th Ode.

Ode 9. The Irmos.

‘Christ, our Fashioner, you magnified the Mother of God who gave you
birth, from whom you put on a body with passions like ours, the
atonement of our faults of ignorance; as we call her blessed, all we
generations magnify you.’

****

Troparia

Wisdom of all, you said to your Apostles, ‘Casting off every stain of
passion, take up a prudent intent, worthy of the divine kingdom. By this
you will be glorified, shining more brilliantly than the sun’.

You said, Lord, to your own disciples, ‘Looking to me alone, do not have
lofty thoughts, but live with humble. Drink the very cup which I drink,
and you shall be glorified in my Father’s kingdom’.

****

Katavasia

Christ, our Fashioner, you magnified the Mother of God who gave you
birth, from whom you put on a body with passions like ours, the
atonement of our faults of ignorance; as we call her blessed, all we
generations magnify you.

**Priest: Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord.**

**Reader: Lord, have mercy.**

**Priest: Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your
grace.**

**Reader: Lord, have mercy.**

**Priest: Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed
and glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the
Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to
Christ our God.**

**Reader: To you, O Lord.**

**Priest: For all the Powers of heaven praise you, and to you we give
glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of
ages.**

**Reader: Amen.**

****

After the small litany, the Exapostilarion sung slowly and solemnly:  
Tone 3. Model Melody.

Your bridal chamber, O my Saviour, I see all adorned, but I have no
garment so that I may enter it. Make bright the mantle of my soul, O
Giver of light, and save me\! (**x3)**

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Idiomel Stichera, doubling them.  
Tone 1

**Psalm 148**  
\[**A\] Let everything that has breath praise the Lord. Praise the Lord
from the heavens; praise him in the highest. To you praise is due, O
God.**

\[**B\] Praise him, all his angels: Praise him, all his Powers. To you
praise is due, O God.**

\[**A\] Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all you stars and light.**

\[**B\] Praise him, you highest heavens and you waters that are above
the heavens. Let them praise the name of the Lord.**

\[**A\] For he spoke and they came into being; he commanded and they
were created.**

\[**B\] He established them for ever and ever; he made an ordinance, and
it shall not pass away.**

\[**A\] Praise the Lord from the earth; praise him, you sea-monsters and
all deeps;**

\[**B\] Fire and hail, snow and ice and storm-wind; things that do his
word.**

\[**A\] Mountains and all hills, fruiting trees and all cedars;**

\[**B\] Beasts of the wild, and all cattle, creeping things and winged
birds;**

\[**A\] Kings of the earth and all peoples, rulers and all judges of the
earth;**

\[**B\] Young men and maidens: old men and youths together, let them
praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone has been exalted.**

\[**A\] His praise is above earth and heaven, and he will exalt the horn
of his people.**

\[**B\] A hymn for all his holy ones; for the children of Israel, a
people that draws near him.**

**Psalm 149**  
\[**A\] Sing to the Lord a new song, his praise in the Church of the
holy ones.**

\[**B\] Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the children of
Sion be joyful in their king.**

\[**A\] Let them praise his name in the dance; let them sing his praise
with timbrel and with harp.**

\[**B\] For the Lord is well-pleased with his people; he will exalt the
meek with salvation.**

\[**A\] His holy ones will exult in glory, and rejoice upon their
beds.**

\[**B\] The high praises of God in their mouths, and two-edged swords in
their hands,**

\[**A\] To exact vengeance among the nations, punishments among the
peoples.**

\[**B\] To bind their kings in fetters; and their nobles in shackles of
iron.**

\[**A\] To execute upon them the judgement that is decreed; such glory
will be for all his holy ones.**

**Psalm 150**  
\[**B\] Praise God in his saints; praise him in the firmament of his
power.**

\[**A\] Praise him for his mighty acts; praise him according to the
greatness of his majesty.**

****

By Monk Kosmas. Tone 1

As the Lord was coming to his voluntary passion, he said to his Apostles
on the road, ‘See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will
be betrayed, as it is written of him’. Come then, let us too, with minds
made pure, journey with him, and let us be crucified with him, and for
his sake become dead to the pleasures of life, that we may live with him
and hear him as he cries, ‘I am no longer going up the earthly Jerusalem
to suffer, but to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.
And I shall raise you up with me to the Jerusalem above, in the kingdom
of heaven’.

\[**B\] Praise him in the blast of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute
and harp.**

As the Lord was coming to his voluntary passion, he said to his Apostles
on the road, ‘See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will
be betrayed, as it is written of him’. Come then, let us too, with minds
made pure, journey with him, and let us be crucified with him, and for
his sake become dead to the pleasures of life, that we may live with him
and hear him as he cries, ‘I am no longer going up the earthly Jerusalem
to suffer, but to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.
And I shall raise you up with me to the Jerusalem above, in the kingdom
of heaven’.

\[**A\] Praise him with the timbrel and dances: praise him upon the
strings and pipe.**

****

By the same. Tone 5

Believers, having reached the saving passion of Christ our God, let us
glorify his ineffable forbearance; so that in his compassion he may,
with himself, also raise us up, who have been slain by sin, as he is
good and loves humankind.

\[**B\] Praise him on fine-sounding cymbals: praise him on cymbals of
gladness. Let everything that has breath praise the Lord.**

Believers, having reached the saving passion of Christ our God, let us
glorify his ineffable forbearance; so that in his compassion he may,
with himself, also raise us up, who have been slain by sin, as he is
good and loves humankind.

\[**A\] Glory. Both now.** **By the same.** **Tone 5**

Lord, as you were coming to your passion, you strengthened your
disciples, taking them aside and saying, ‘How have you not remembered my
words, which I spoke to you of old, ‘Is it not written no prophet may be
killed but in Jerusalem’? Now the moment has come of which I spoke to
you. For see, I am being handed over to be mocked by the hands of
sinners, who, when they have nailed me to a cross and handed me over for
burial, will reckon me a loathsome corpse. Nevertheless, take courage,
for on the third day I arise, for the joy of believers and eternal
life’.

****

Then the Superior says:

To you glory is due, O Lord, our God, and to you we give glory, to the
Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to
ages of ages. Amen.

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men. We
praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we thank you
for your great glory. O Lord, heavenly King, God the almighty Father. O
Lord, only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit. Lord God,
lamb of God, Son of the Father, who takes away the sin of the world,
have mercy upon us, who takes away the sins of the world. Receive our
prayer, you who sit on the right hand of the Father and have mercy upon
us. For you alone are holy, you alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to the
glory of God the Father. Amen.

Every day I will bless you, and praise your name for ever and ever. I
said, Lord, have mercy upon me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against
you. Lord, I have run to you for refuge; teach me to do your will for
you are my God. For with you is the source of life, and in your light we
shall see light. O continue your merciful kindness toward those who know
you.

Grant, Lord, this day to keep us without sin. Blessed are you, Lord, the
God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is your name for to the
ages. Amen. May your mercy, Lord, be upon us, as we have hoped in you.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes. Blessed are you, Master,
make me understand your statutes. Blessed are you, Holy One, enlighten
me with your statutes. Lord, your mercy is for ever; do not scorn the
work of your hands. To you praise is due, to you song is due, to you
glory is due, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

**Priest: Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord.**

**Reader: Lord, have mercy.**

Help us, save, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.  
That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us
ask the Lord.

**Reader: Grant this, O Lord.**

**Priest: An Angel of peace, a faithful guide and guardian of our souls
and bodies, let us ask of the Lord.**  
Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the
Lord.  
Things good, and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let
us ask of the Lord.  
That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let
us ask of the Lord.  
A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a
good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.  
Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

**Reader: To you, O Lord.**

**Priest: For you are a God of mercies and of pity, and to you we give
glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages.**

**Reader: Amen.**

**Priest: Peace to all.**

**Reader: And to your spirit.**

**Priest: Let us bow our heads to the Lord.**

**Reader: To you, O Lord.**

**Priest: For yours it is to show mercy and to save us, O our God, and
to you we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages.**

**Reader: Amen.**

****

After the Litany and the Prayer at the Bowing down of heads, the
Aposticha:  
By Monk Kosmas. Tone 5

O Lord, the mother of the sons of Zebedee, not understanding the
ineffable mystery of your dispensation, asked you to grant her own
children the honour of a temporary kingdom; but instead of this you
promised your friends that they would drink cup of death; a cup which
you said you would drink before them, a cleansing from sins. And so we
cry to you: O Salvation of our souls, glory to you\!

**Verse 1. We were filled in the morning with your mercy, O Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad, for all the
days you have afflicted us, for the years we have suffered adversity.
Look upon your servants and your works, and guide their children.**

****

By the Same.

O Lord, instructing your own disciples to think thoughts of perfection,
you said, ‘Do not to be like the nations, so as to rule over the least
strong. It shall not be so with you, my disciples, because my wish is to
be poor. The first among you, then, let him be the servant of all; the
ruler as the ruled, the leader as the last. For I have come to serve
Adam who became poor, and to give my life as a ransom for many, those
who cry to me: Glory to you\!’

**Verse 2. And may the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us. Direct
the work of our hands, O direct the work of our hands.**

Fearing the punishment of the withered fig tree, because of its lack of
fruit, brethren, let us offer fruits worthy of repentance to Christ, who
grants us his great mercy.

Glory. Both now. **By the same. Tone 8.**

The serpent, having found in the Egyptian woman a second Eve, hastened
by flatteries to trip up Joseph; but he, abandoning his tunic, fled from
sin, and though naked was not ashamed, like the first formed before his
disobedience. At his entreaties, O Christ, have mercy on us.

****

Then the Superior says:

How good to give thanks to the Lord, to sing praises to your name, O
Most High. To declare your love in the morning, and your truth every
night.

**Reader: Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (three
times).**

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

**Priest: For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages.**

**Reader: Amen.**

**After the Our Father, we say the following Apolytikion:**

Standing in the temple of your glory, we think we stand in heaven, O
Mother of God. O gate of heaven, open to us the door of your mercy.

\[**The modern Greek books replace this with the Kontakion of the day:
Jacob lamented the loss of Joseph, and the noble one was seated in a
chariot, honoured like a king; for as he had not been slave to the
pleasures of the Egyptian woman, he was glorified in return by the one
who sees the hearts of men, and bestows an incorruptible crown.\]**

**Then Lord have mercy (x40). Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father.**

**Priest: Blessed be he who is.**

**The Superior: Heavenly King, establish our rulers: strengthen the
faith: calm the nations: make the world peaceful: guard well this holy
church \[monastery\]: assign our fathers and brothers who have gone
before us to the tents of the just, and accept us in repentance and
confession, as you are good and love humankind.**

****

Then the prayer of St Ephrem with 4 full and 12 small metanias

Lord and Master of my life, do not give me a spirit of sloth, idle
curiosity, love of power and useless chatter. (**Prostration)**

Rather accord to me, your servant, a spirit of chastity, humility,
patience and love. (**Prostration)**

Yes, Lord and King, grant me to see my own faults, and not to condemn my
brother; for you are blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.
(**Prostration)**

****

We then make 12 small metanias, then one further great metania as we
repeat the last line of the prayer.

**Then at once Come let us worship, and the First Hour, during which we
do not add a Kathisma of the Psalter, nor at the Ninth Hour.**

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

