\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyThu.md) \] \[ [Matins](HWThu-M.md) \]
\[ First Hour \] \[ [Hours and Typika](HWThu-Hrs.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](HWThu-Ves.md) \]
\[ [Washing of the Feet](washing_of_the_feet.md) \]

## 

FIRST HOUR

****

The First Hour being joined to the Morning Office, as has been said
above, begins straight away with:

> > Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
> > Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ, the King, our
> > God.  
> > Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King,
> > our God.

****

Three Metanias and the Psalms:

Psalm 5  

Give ear to my words, O Lord, understand my cry. Attend to the voice of
my supplication, my King and my God; for to you I shall pray, O Lord. In
the morning you will hear my voice. In the morning I shall stand before
you, and you will watch over me; because you are not a God who wants
iniquity. The evildoer will not dwell with you, nor will the lawless
remain before your eyes. You have hated all those who work iniquity; you
will destroy all those who speak lies. The Lord abhors a man of
bloodshed and deceit. But I in the abundance of your mercy shall enter
your house, I shall worship towards your holy temple in fear of you.
Guide me, Lord, in your righteousness because of my enemies, direct my
way before you. Because there is no truth in their mouths; their heart
is vain. Their throat is an open tomb, they deceive with their tongues.
Judge them, O God. Let them fall through their counsels; according to
the multitude of their impieties cast them out, for they have embittered
you, O Lord. And may all those who hope in you be glad; they will
rejoice for ever, and you will dwell among them, and all those who love
your name will boast in you. Because you will bless the righteous; you
have crowned him, O Lord, with your good pleasure. ****

Psalm 89  

Lord, you have been our refuge from one generation to another. Before
the mountains came into being or the earth and the world was formed,
from age to age you are. Do not turn mankind back to humiliation, and
you said: Turn back, children of men. Because a thousand years in your
eyes, O Lord, are like a day, or like yesterday which has passed, and
like a watch in the night. Their years will be mere trifles, in the
morning like grass may he pass away. In the morning let him flower and
pass away; in the evening let him fall, dry up and wither. Because we
have perished in your anger, and in your wrath we have been dismayed.
You have set our iniquities before you; our age in the light of your
countenance. Because all our days have perished, and in your anger we
have perished; our years they considered like a spider. The days of our
years there are seventy years in them, but if we are strong, eighty, and
the majority of them are labour and toil; because weakness has come over
us and we shall be chastened. Who knows the might of your anger? And can
gauge your wrath from fear of you? So make your right hand known to me,
and those chastened in heart by wisdom. Turn back, O Lord, how long? And
be entreated for your servants. We have been filled in the morning with
your mercy, O Lord, and we have rejoiced and been glad. In all our days
let be glad; in return for the days when you humbled us, the years when
we saw evils. And look upon your servants and upon the work of your
hands and guide your children. And let the brightness of the Lord be
upon us, and direct the works of our hands for us and direct the work of
our hand. ****

Psalm 100  

I will sing to you of mercy and judgement, O Lord, I will chant and
think on a blameless way: when will you come to me? I have walked in the
midst of my house in the innocence of my heart. I have set no lawless
deed before my eyes; I have hated those who commit transgressions. No
twisted heart has been attached to me; the evil man who avoids me I have
not acknowledged. The man who secretly slanders his neighbour, him I
have driven out. With a man of proud looks and insatiate heart, I have
not eaten. My eyes are upon the faithful in the land, for them to dwell
with me; the man who walks on a blameless way, he has ministered to me.
The man who acts proudly has not dwelt in my house; the man who speaks
calumnies has not prospered before me. Morning by morning I slew all the
sinners in the land, to purge from the Lord’s city all workers of
iniquity.

Glory. Both now. Alleluia (

**x3**). Lord, have mercy (**x3**).

Glory.

**Apolytikion. Tone 8**

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of the feet,
then Judas the ungodly was stricken and darkened with the love of money;
and to lawless judges he delivered you, the just judge. O lover of
money, look upon him who for its sake hanged himself; flee from the
insatiable soul, which dared such things against the Teacher. O you who
are good to all, Lord, glory to you.

Both now.

**Theotokion**

What shall we call you, O Full of grace? Heaven? For you made the Sun of
righteousness to dawn. Paradise? For you made the flower of incorruption
blossom. Virgin? For you remained incorrupt. Pure Mother? For you held
in your holy embrace a Son who is the God of all. Implore him that our
souls may be saved.

****

Troparion of the Prophecy.  
Tone 3.

You were struck on behalf of the human race and were not angered; \*
free our life from corruption, Lord, and save us.

Glory.

Free our life from corruption, Lord, and save us.

Both now.

You were struck on behalf of the human race and were not angered; \*
free our life from corruption, Lord, and save us.

Prokeimenon. Tone 1.

Let all the nations know that the Lord is your name.

****

Verse:

O God, who shall be likened to you?

The Reading from the Prophecy of Jeremias.  
\[

**11:18-12:5a.9b-11a.14-15**\]

Lord, make me know, and I shall know; then I saw their practices. But I,
like an innocent lamb led to be sacrificed, did not know; against me
they devised an evil thought, saying: Come, and let us cast wood into
his bread and let us wipe him out of the land of the living, and let his
name be remembered no more. Lord, you judge justly, you try reins and
hearts, may I see vengeance upon them from you, because I have revealed
to you my justification. Therefore thus says the Lord to the men of
Anathoth who seek for my life and who say: Do not prophesy in the name
of the Lord, otherwise you will die at our hands. See, I shall visit
them; their youths will die by the sword, their sons and daughters will
perish by hunger, and there will not be a remnant of them; because I
shall bring evils upon the inhabitants of Anathoth, in the year of their
visitation. \[

**12:1**\] You are just, Lord, so I shall make my defence to you,
moreover I shall speak of judgements to you: why does the way of the
ungodly go well? Those who set breaches of faith at nothing have
prospered, you planted them and they have taken root; they begot
children and produced fruit; you are near to their mouth and far from
their reins. And you, Lord, know me, you have tried my heart before you;
purify them for the day of their slaughter. How long will the land
grieve and the grass of the field be dried from the wickedness of its
inhabitants? Animals and birds have vanished, because they \<the
inhabitants\> said: God will not see our ways. Your feet run and make
you faint. Assemble all the beasts of the field and let them come and
eat it. Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard, they have defiled my
portion, they have made my desired portion a trackless desert, it has
been made into utter destruction. Because thus says the Lord of all the
evil neighbours who touch my inheritance, which I have apportioned to my
people Israel: See, I shall drag them from their land and I shall cast
Juda out of their midst. And it shall be that after I have cast them
out, I shall turn back and have mercy on them, and I shall make them
dwell, each in his inheritance and each in his land.

Prokeimenon. Tone 6.

Make your vows to the Lord our God and keep them.

****

Verse:

God is known in Judea; his name is great in Israel. ****

Then we chant the following Verses:

Direct my steps according to your word, and let no iniquity lord it over
me.  
Deliver me from the slander of men, and I shall keep your
commandments.  
Let your face shine on your servant, and teach me your statutes.  
Let my mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that I may hymn your
glory, all day long your splendour.

****

Then:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Kontakion. Tone 2.

After taking the bread into his hands the traitor secretly stretches
them out and takes the price of the One who fashioned mankind with his
own hands; and he remained unrepentant, Judas the slave and deceiver.

****

Then:

Lord, have mercy. (**x40**)

At every time and at every hour, in heaven and on earth worshipped and
glorified, Christ God, longsuffering, great in mercy, great in
compassion, loving the just and merciful to sinners, calling all to
salvation by the promise of the blessings to come; do you, Lord,
yourself accept our entreaties at this hour, and direct our lives to
your commandments. Sanctify our souls, purify our bodies, correct our
thoughts, cleanse our ideas and deliver us from every distress, evil,
and pain. Wall us about with your holy Angels, that protected and guided
by their host we may reach the unity of the faith and the knowledge of
your unapproachable glory; for you are blessed to the ages of ages.
Amen.

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and
beyond compare more glorious than the Seraphim, without corruption you
gave birth to God the Word, truly the Mother of God we magnify you. In
the name of the Lord, bless, Father. ****

Priest:

May God take pity on us and bless us and show the light of his
countenance on us and have mercy on us. ****

The Superior says the following prayer:

Christ, the true light, you enlighten and sanctify everyone who comes
into the world, may the light of your countenance be signed upon us,
that in it we may see your unapproachable light; and direct our steps to
the doing of your commandments; at the intercessions of your all-most
pure Mother and of all your Saints. Amen.

****

Reader:

** To you my Champion and Commander I your city saved from disasters
dedicate, O Mother of God, hymns of victory and thanksgiving; but as you
have unassailable might from every kind of danger now deliver me, that I
may cry to you: Hail, Bride without bridegroom\! ****

And Dismissal.

The other Hours are sung plainly with three psalms, and the Beatitudes
are read simply, in which we also say the Kontakion of the day.

Note that the Liti in the Narthex is dropped from today until the Sunday
of Antipascha.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

