\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](holyThu.md) \] \[ Matins \]
\[ [First Hour](HWThu01.md) \] \[ [Hours and Typika](HWThu-Hrs.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](HWThu-Ves.md) \]
\[ [Washing of the Feet](washing_of_the_feet.md) \]

# ON HOLY AND GREAT THURSDAY

****

The Midnight Office is read in the Church

\[**and not, as usually on weekdays, in the Narthex, or Liti**\] **as
during Great Lent.**

## 

AT MATINS

****

After the Dismissal of the Midnight Office the Priest, having made the
customary metania to the Superior, or to his stall, enters the sanctuary
and makes three bows before the holy Table. He puts on the Epitrachelion
and, standing in front of the holy Table, intones:

Blessed is our God, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

Reader:

Amen. ****

The Priest blesses the incense and begins to cense the sanctuary and the
whole church as usual.

The Reader begins:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen.

Lord, have mercy (

**x12**). Glory. Both now.

Come, let us worship and fall down before the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ the King, our God.  
Come, let us worship and fall down before Christ himself, the King, our
God.

****

With three metanias; then the following two psalms.

Psalm 19  

May the Lord hear you in the day of trouble; may the name of the God of
Jacob shield you. May he send you his help from the holy place, and
support you from Sion. May he remember your every sacrifice, and accept
with favour your whole burnt offering. May the Lord give you your
heart’s desire, and fulfil your every purpose. We shall rejoice in
your salvation, and be magnified in the name of our the Lord our God.
May the Lord fulfil all your petitions. Now I know that the Lord has
saved his Christ. He will hear him from his holy heaven; in mighty acts
is the salvation of his right hand. Some put their trust in chariots and
some in horses, but we will call on the name of the Lord our God. They
were fettered and fell, but we have risen and been set upright. Lord,
save the king, and hear us on the day we call upon you. ****

Psalm 20  

The king will rejoice in your power, O Lord, he will exult exceedingly
in your salvation. You gave him his heart’s desire; you did not deny him
the request of his lips. For you came to meet him with blessings of
goodness; you placed a crown of precious stones upon his head. He asked
you for life, and you gave him length of days for age on age. Great is
his glory because of your salvation; you will place on him glory and
majesty. For you will give him blessing for age on age, and make him
glad with the joy of your countenance. For the king puts his hope in the
Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be shaken. May
your hand light upon all your enemies, and your right hand find out all
who hate you. You will make them like a blazing oven at the time of your
presence. The Lord will confound them in his wrath and fire will devour
them. You will destroy their offspring from the earth, and their seed
from among the children of humankind. Because they intended evils
against you, and devised plans by which they can in no way succeed. For
you will put them to flight; among your remnants you will prepare their
presence. Be exalted, Lord, in your power; we will sing and praise your
mighty acts.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (

**three times**)

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed; your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

The priest must take care that he is standing beneath the Polyeleos to
say this conclusion. He then enters the sanctuary, puts away the censer
and takes his stand in front of the Holy Table.

Reader:

Amen. ****

And the following Troparia:

Lord, save your people, and bless your inheritance, granting your
faithful people victory over their enemies, and guarding your
commonwealth by your Cross.

Glory.

Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, grant you mercies, Christ God,
to the new commonwealth called by your name. Make your faithful people
glad by your power, giving them victory over their enemies. May they
have your help in battle, a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Dread Champion that cannot be put to shame, do not despise our
petitions, O Good One. All-praised Mother of God establish the
commonwealth of the Orthodox, save your people and give them victory
from heaven, for you gave birth to God, O only blessed one.

****

Priest:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy. We pray you,
hear and have mercy. ****

Reader:

Lord have mercy (**x3**). ****

Priest:

For you, O God, are merciful, and love humankind, and to you we give
glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and
to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. In the name of the Lord, give the blessing, Father. ****

Priest:

Glory to the holy, consubstantial, life-giving and undivided Trinity,
always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen.

THE SIX PSALMS

****

And we begin the Six Psalms, listening with complete silence and
compunction. The Superior, or the designated reader, with devotion and
fear of God says:

Glory to God in the highest, and peace on earth, goodwill among men (

**x3**).

Lord, you will open my lips: and my mouth will declare your praise (

**x2**). ****

Psalm 3  

Lord, why have those who afflict me been multiplied? Many rise against
me. Many say to my soul, ‘There is no salvation for him in his God’. But
you, Lord, are my helper, my glory, and the one who lifts up my head.
With my voice, I cried to the Lord, and he heard me from his holy
mountain. I lay down and slept; I awoke, because the Lord will assist
me. I will not be afraid of tens of thousands of people who surround me.
Rise, Lord, save me, my God; because you have struck all who are vainly
my foes. You have smashed the teeth of sinners. Salvation is the Lord’s,
and your blessing is upon your people. ****

And again:

I lay down and slept; I awoke because the Lord will assist me.

****

Psalm 37  

Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger, nor chastise me in your wrath. For
your arrows have been stuck fast in me, and you have laid a heavy hand
upon me. There is no healing in my flesh on account of your wrath, nor
peace in my bones on account of my sins. My iniquities flooded over my
head; like a heavy burden they weighed heavily upon me. My wounds stank
and festered on account of my foolishness. I was wretched and utterly
bowed down; I went about mourning all day long. For my loins were filled
with mockings, and there is no healing in my flesh. I was maltreated and
humiliated exceedingly; I howled from the groaning of my heart. Lord,
all my desire is before you, and my groaning was not hidden from you. My
heart was troubled, my strength failed me; and even the light of my eyes
had gone from me. My friends and my neighbours drew near and stood
against me, and those nearest me stood far away. Those who sought my
life used force, and those who sought evils for me spoke vanities, and
meditated trickeries all day long. But I, like a deaf man, heard
nothing; like one who is dumb, who does not open his mouth. So I became
like one who cannot hear, and in whose mouth there are no rebukes. For
in you, Lord, I have hoped; you will answer me, O Lord my God. For I
said: Let my foes never exult over me. When my foot slipped they crowed
over me. For I am ready for blows and my pain is with me continually.
For I will declare my iniquity and be troubled at my sin. But my enemies
live and have prevailed over me, and those who hate me unjustly have
been multiplied. Those who repay me with evils in place of good have
slandered me, since I pursued goodness. Do not forsake me, Lord; my God,
do not go far from me. Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation. ****

And again.

Do not forsake me, Lord; my God do not go far from me.

Hasten to help me, Lord of my salvation.

****

Psalm 62  

O God, my God, I watch for you at dawn; my soul has thirsted for you, my
flesh how often in a desert, untrodden and waterless land. Thus I
appeared before you in the holy place, to see your power and your glory.
For your mercy is better than life; my lips will praise you. So I will
bless you as long as I live, and in your name I will lift up my hands.
May my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness; my mouth will praise
you with joyful lips. When I remembered you upon my bed, every dawn I
meditated upon you. For you became my helper, and in the shelter of your
wings I shall rejoice. My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld
me. But those who vainly sought my life will go down to the deepest
parts of the earth, they will be delivered to the power of the sword,
they will be portions for foxes. But the king will rejoice in God, and
all who swear by him will be praised; for the mouths of those who speak
iniquities have been stopped. ****

And again.

Every dawn I meditated upon you, for you became my helper, and in the
shelter of your wings I shall rejoice.

My soul clung to you; and your right hand upheld me.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (

**x3, without Metanias**). Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord,
have mercy.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit. Both now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Psalm 87  

Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day, and by night also before
you. Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn you ear to my
supplication. For my soul was filled with evils, and my life drew near
to Hell. I was reckoned among those that go down to the Pit; I became as
one that has no help, free among the dead. Like the slain that sleep in
the tomb, whom you remembered no more; and they were cut off from your
power. They placed me in the lowest Pit; in darkness and in the shadow
of death. Your wrath lay heavy upon me, and you brought all your waves
against me. You put my friends far from me, and made me an abomination
to them. I was handed over and I came out; my eyes grew weak because of
my beggary. I cried to you, Lord, all the day; I stretched out my hands
towards you. Will you work wonders for the dead; or will physicians
raise them up again to praise you? Will any declare your mercy in the
tomb, or your truth in the place of destruction? Will your wonders be
known in the dark, or your justice in a land that has been forgotten?
But to you, Lord, I have cried, and in the morning my prayer will come
before you. Why have you rejected my soul, Lord; why do you turn away
your face from me? I am poor and in toils since my youth; exalted, I was
humbled and brought to despair. Your fierce anger overwhelmed me, and
your terrors appalled me. They surrounded me like water all day long;
they closed in upon me from every side. Friend and neighbour you have
put far from me, and my companions because of my misery. ****

And again.

Lord, God of my salvation, I have cried by day; and by night also before
you.

Let my prayer come into your presence, and turn your ear to my
supplication.

****

The priest comes from the Altar and reads the morning prayers quietly.

Psalm 102  

Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget none of his benefits. He
forgives all your iniquities; he heals all your diseases; he redeems
your life from corruption and crowns you with mercy and compassion; he
satisfies your desire with good things; your youth will be renewed like
an eagle’s. The Lord performs deeds of mercy and judgement for all who
are oppressed. He made known his ways to Moses, his wishes to the
children of Israel. The Lord is compassionate and merciful,
long-suffering and full of mercy. He will not always be wrathful, nor
will he be enraged for ever. He has not dealt with us according to our
iniquities, nor rewarded us according to our sins. For, like the height
of heaven above the earth, the Lord has made his mercy prevail over
those that fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far has he
taken our sins from us. As a father takes pity on his children the Lord
has taken pity on those who fear him. For he knows of what we are made;
has remembered that we are but dust. As for man, his days are but as
grass, he will blossom like a flower of the field; for when a wind has
passed over it, it will be no more and will know its place no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is for ever and ever upon those who fear him;
and his justice upon their children’s children, upon those who keep his
covenant and remember his commandments to do them. The Lord has prepared
his throne in heaven and his kingdom rules over all. Bless the Lord, all
you his Angels, powerful in strength, who perform his word, and listen
to the voice of his words. Bless the Lord, all you his Powers, his
Ministers who do his will. Bless the Lord, all you his works. In every
place of his dominion, bless the Lord, O my soul\! ****

And again.

In every place of his dominion: bless the Lord, O my soul\!

****

Psalm 142  

Lord, hear my prayer: in your truth give ear to my supplication, and in
your justice hear me. Do not enter into judgement with your servant: for
in your sight no one living can be justified. For the enemy pursued my
soul, humbled my life to the ground. Made me dwell in darkness, like
those for ever dead. My spirit grew despondent within me and my heart
within me was troubled. I remembered days of old, I meditated on all
your works: I made the works of your hands my meditation. I stretched
out my hands towards you: my soul thirsted for you like a waterless
land. Hear me swiftly, O Lord, my spirit has failed. Do not turn your
face from me, or I shall be like those who go down to the Pit. Make me
hear of your mercy in the morning, for I have hoped in you. Make known
to me the way in which I should walk, for to you I have lifted up my
soul. Deliver me from my enemies, Lord: I have run to you for shelter.
Teach me to do your will, for you are my God. Your good Spirit will
guide me in an upright land. For your name’s sake, O Lord, you will give
me life. In your justice, you will bring my soul out of trouble, in your
mercy slay my enemies, and destroy all those that afflict my soul, for I
am your servant. ****

And again.

In your justice hear me, O Lord, and do not enter into judgement with
your servant. (

**x2**)

Your good Spirit will guide me in an upright land.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

Amen. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. Glory to you, O God (

**x3**). **Metanias** (**x3**) ****

Then the Litany by the Priest, outside the Sanctuary.

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. And so after each petition.

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop

**N**., for the honoured order of presbyters, for the diaconate in
Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

\[For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Father and Abbot

**N**. and for all our brotherhood in Christ, let us pray to the Lord.\]

For this holy monastery, for every monastery, city, town and village,
and for the faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

We sing

Alleluia **3 times in the 8th Tone, saying first one of the following
verses.**

Verse 1

. From nightfall my spirit is awake for you, O God, for your commands
are light upon the earth. ****

Verse 2.

Learn justice, inhabitants of the earth. ****

Verse 3.

Jealousy will seize an untaught people, and now fire devours their
adversaries. ****

Verse 4.

Bring evils upon them, O Lord, bring evils upon them, the glorious ones
of the earth. ****

Then the following Troparion is sung solemnly 3 times.  
Tone 8

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of the feet,
then Judas the ungodly was stricken and darkened with the love of money;
and to lawless judges he delivered you, the just judge. O lover of
money, look upon him who for its sake hanged himself; flee from the
insatiable soul, which dared such things against the Teacher. O you who
are good to all, Lord, glory to you.

Glory.

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of the feet,
then Judas the ungodly was stricken and darkened with the love of money;
and to lawless judges he delivered you, the just judge. O lover of
money, look upon him who for its sake hanged himself; flee from the
insatiable soul, which dared such things against the Teacher. O you who
are good to all, Lord, glory to you.

Both now.

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of the feet,
then Judas the ungodly was stricken and darkened with the love of money;
and to lawless judges he delivered you, the just judge. O lover of
money, look upon him who for its sake hanged himself; flee from the
insatiable soul, which dared such things against the Teacher. O you who
are good to all, Lord, glory to you.

\[

**The modern Greek books place a small Litany here, with the
ekphonesis,** For yours is the might…\]

\[

**The Russian Typikon prescribes three readings, one after each
Kathisma, from St John Chrysostom’s commentary on St Matthew’s Gospel,
without specifying the references precisely.**\] ****

And at once the Priest says:

And that he would count us worthy to listen to the holy Gospel, let us
pray to the Lord God.

****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy, Lord, have mercy, Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. Peace to all.
****

Reader:

And to your Spirit. ****

Priest:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to Luke. ****

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\! ****

Priest:

Let us attend.

\[

**22:1-39**\]

At that time the festival of Unleavened Bread, which is called the
Passover, was near. The chief priests and the scribes were looking for a
way to put Jesus to death, for they were afraid of the people. Then
Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was one of the number of
the twelve; he went away and conferred with the chief priests and
officers of the temple police about how he might betray him to them.
They were greatly pleased and agreed to give him money. So he consented
and began to look for an opportunity to betray him to them when no crowd
was present. Then came the day of Unleavened Bread, on which the
Passover had to be sacrificed. So he sent Peter and John, saying, ‘Go
and prepare the Passover for us that we may eat it.’ They asked him,
‘Where do you want us to make preparations?’ He said to them, ‘See,
when you have entered the city, a man carrying a jar of water will meet
you; follow him into the house he enters and say to the master of the
house, ‘The teacher says to you, ‘Where is the guest room, where I may
eat the Passover with my disciples?’’ He will show you a large upper
room, already furnished. Make preparations for us there.’ So they went
and found everything as he had told them; and they prepared the
Passover. When the hour came, he took his place at the table, and the
twelve apostles with him. He said to them, ‘I have eagerly desired to
eat this Passover with you before I suffer; for I tell you, I will not
of eat it any longer until it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.’ Then
he took the cup, and after giving thanks he said, ‘Take this and divide
it among yourselves; for I tell you that from now on I will not drink of
the fruit of the vine until the kingdom of God comes.’ Then he took a
loaf of bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it and gave it to
them, saying, ‘This is my body, which is given for you. Do this in
remembrance of me.’ And he did the same with the cup after supper,
saying, ‘This cup is the new covenant in my blood that is poured out for
you. But see, the one who betrays me is with me, and his hand is on the
table. For the Son of Man is going as it has been determined, but woe to
that one by whom he is betrayed\!’ Then they began to ask one another,
which one of them it could be who would do this. A dispute also arose
among them as to which one of them was to be regarded as the greatest.
But he said to them, ‘The kings of the nations lord it over them; and
those in authority over them are called benefactors. But not so with
you; rather the greatest among you must become like the youngest, and
the leader like one who serves. For who is greater, the one who is at
the table or the one who serves? Is it not the one at the table? But I
am among you as one who serves. You are those who have stood by me in my
trials; and I confer on you, just as my Father has conferred on me, a
kingdom, so that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
you will sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Simon,
Simon, see\! Satan has demanded to sift all of you like wheat, but I
have prayed for you that your own faith may not fail; and you, when once
you have turned back, strengthen your brothers.’ And he said to him,
‘Lord, I am ready to go with you to prison and to death\!’ Jesus said,
‘I tell you, Peter, the cock will not crow today, until you have denied
three times that you know me.’ He said to them, ‘When I sent you out
without a purse, bag, or sandals, did you lack anything?’ They said,
‘Nothing.’ He said to them, ‘But now, the one who has a purse must
take it, and likewise a bag. And the one who has no sword must sell his
cloak and buy one. For I tell you, this scripture must be fulfilled in
me, ‘And he was counted among the lawless’; and indeed what is written
about me is being fulfilled.’ They said, ‘Lord, look, here are two
swords.’ He replied, ‘It is enough.’ He came out and went, as was his
custom, to the Mount of Olives; and the disciples followed him.

****

Reader:

Glory to you, Lord, glory to you\! ****

And at once:

Lord, have mercy (

**x3**). Glory. Both now. ****

Psalm 50  

Have mercy on me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy. According
to the multitude of your compassion blot out my offence. Wash me
thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin. For I
acknowledge my wickedness, and my sin is ever before me. Against you
alone I have sinned and done what is evil in your sight, that you may be
justified in your words and win when you are judged. For see, in
wickedness I was conceived and in sin my mother bore me. For see, you
have loved truth; you have shown me the hidden and secret things of your
wisdom. You will sprinkle me with hyssop and I shall be cleansed. You
will wash me and I shall be made whiter than snow. You will make me hear
of joy and gladness; the bones which have been humbled will rejoice.
Turn away your face from my sins and blot out all my iniquities. Create
a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me. Do not
cast me out from your presence, and do not take your Holy Spirit from
me. Give me back the joy of your salvation, and establish me with your
sovereign Spirit. I will teach transgressors your ways, and sinners will
turn to you again. O God, the God of my salvation, deliver me from
bloodshed and my tongue will rejoice at your justice. Lord, you will
open my lips, and my mouth will proclaim your praise. For if you had
wanted a sacrifice, I would have given it. You will not take pleasure in
burnt offerings. A sacrifice to God is a broken spirit; a broken and a
humbled heart God will not despise. Do good to Sion, Lord, in your good
pleasure; and let the walls of Jerusalem be rebuilt. Then you will be
well pleased with a sacrifice of righteousness, oblation and whole burnt
offerings. Then they will offer calves upon your altar. ****

We begin the Canon by St Kosmas, of which the Acrostic is:  

On great Thursday a great hymn I sing. ****

In each Ode the Irmos is sung twice, and the troparia are repeated to
make 12. The Irmos is repeated as Katavasia.

Ode 1. Tone 6. Irmos

‘The Red Sea by a cut staff is cut, the deep, source of waves, grows
dry, itself becomes pathway for the unarmed and a tomb for the fully
armed. A song pleasing to God was raised, ‘Christ our God has been
greatly glorified’.’

****

Troparia

The cause of all and source of life, the infinite Wisdom of God, has
built himself a house from a pure mother who did not know man; for
putting on the temple of his body Christ our God has been greatly
glorified.

Instructing his friends in the mysteries, the true Wisdom of God
prepares a table to nourish souls, mixes the bowl of immortality for
believers. Let us draw near with reverence and let us cry, ‘Christ our
God has been greatly glorified’.

All we believers, let us listen as with loud proclamation the uncreated,
natural Wisdom of God invites us, for he cries, ‘Taste and know that I
am good. Shout aloud, ‘Christ our God has been greatly glorified’’.

****

Katavasia

The Red Sea by a cut staff is cut, the deep, source of waves, grows dry,
itself becomes a pathway for the unarmed and a tomb for the fully armed.
A song pleasing to God was raised, ‘Christ our God has been greatly
glorified’.

****

Ode 3. Irmos

‘Though Lord and creator of all, O God, you, the impassible, becoming
poor, united the created to yourself; and being the Passover, you
offered yourself to those for whom you were about to die, crying, ‘Eat
my body, and you will be established by faith’.’

****

Troparia

Filling your own cup of gladness, pledge of all the mortal race, you
gave it to your disciples to drink, loving Lord; for you offer yourself
in sacrifice, crying, ‘Drink my blood, and you will be established by
faith’.

‘Foolish the man who is the traitor among you’, you declared, forbearing
Lord, to your own disciples, ‘He will not know, and being without
understanding, will not understand these things; but abide in me, and
you will be established by faith’.

****

Katavasia

Though Lord and creator of all, O God, you, the impassible, becoming
poor, united the created to yourself; and being the Passover, you
offered yourself to those for whom you were about to die, crying, ‘Eat
my body, and you will be established by faith.’

****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed and
glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints,
let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God. ****

Reader:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For you are our God, and to you we give glory, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

After the small litany, Kathisma.

Tone 1. The soldiers watching.

The One who made lakes and springs and seas, instructing us in
surpassing humility, girding himself with a towel, washed his disciples’
feet, humbling himself in the abundance of his compassion and exalting
us from the depths of wickedness, he who alone loves humankind.

****

Another. Tone 3.

Humbling yourself through compassion, you washed your disciples’ feet,
set them straight on the course of God. Peter, though he refused to be
washed, submitted in turn to the divine command, was washed and begged
you insistently to grant us your great mercy.

****

Another. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

As you ate with your disciples, Master, you mystically revealed your
all-holy slaughter, through which we, who honour your revered
sufferings, were rescued from corruption.

****

Ode 4. Irmos

‘The Prophet, foreseeing your ineffable mystery, O Christ, proclaimed
beforehand, ‘You revealed the mighty love of your strength, merciful
Father; for you sent the Only-Begotten, O Good One, to the world as
atonement’.’

****

Troparia

As you went to your passion, the source of dispassion for all the
descendants of Adam, you said to your friends, O Christ, ‘I have desired
to share this Passover with you, since the Father has sent me, the
Only-Begotten, to the world as atonement’.

As you partook of the cup with the Disciples, O Immortal, you cried,
‘Now I drink no more of the fruit of the vine with you in this life;
since the Father has sent me, the Only-Begotten, to the world as
atonement’.

O Christ, you said to your friends, ‘I say that in my kingdom I am
drinking a new drink beyond understanding; for I shall be with you, God
as among gods; for the Father has sent me, the Only-Begotten, to the
world as atonement.

****

Katavasia

The Prophet, foreseeing your ineffable mystery, O Christ, proclaimed
beforehand, ‘You revealed the mighty love of your strength, merciful
Father; for you sent the Only-Begotten, O Good One, to the world as
atonement’.

****

Ode 5. Irmos

‘Bound with the bond of love, the Apostles offered themselves to Christ
the Master of all things; when their beautiful feet had been washed
clean, they bring good tidings of peace to all.’

****

Troparia

The Wisdom of God who restrains the ungovernable upper water in the air,
bridles the deeps and holds back the sea, pours water in a basin; the
Master washes the feet of servants.

The Master shows his Disciples a model of humility; he who wraps the sky
in clouds and whose his hand is the breath of all that is, girds himself
with a towel and bends the knee to wash the feet of servants;.

****

Katavasia

Bound with the bond of love, the Apostles offered themselves to Christ
the Master of all things; when their beautiful feet had been washed
clean they bring good tidings of peace to all.

****

Ode 6. Irmos

‘The lowest deep of sins has closed round me, and no longer able to
endure its tempest, like Jonas I cry out to you, Master, ‘Bring me up
from corruption’.’

****

Troparia

‘You call me Lord and Teacher, my disciples, for so I am’, you cried, O
Saviour. ‘And so imitate the example, the way you have seen in me’.

‘One who has no stain does not need his feet washed. You, my disciples,
are clean, but not all; for the inclination of one of you is to insane
folly’.

****

Katavasia

The lowest deep of sins has closed round me, and no longer able to
endure its tempest, like Jonas I cry out to you, Master, ‘Bring me up
from corruption’.

****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed and
glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints,
let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God. ****

Reader:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For you are the King of peace and the Saviour of our souls, and to you
we give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

After the small litany the Kontakion

Tone 2. By Romanos the Melodist.

After taking the bread into his hands the traitor secretly stretches
them out and takes the price of the One who fashioned humankind with his
own hands; and he remained unrepentant, Judas the slave and deceiver.

****

The Ikos.

As we all draw near with fear to the mystic table, let us receive the
Bread with pure souls, remaining beside the Master that we may see how
he washes the feet of the Disciples and dries them with the towel, and
let us do as we have seen, being subject to one another and washing one
another’s feet; for Christ himself so ordered his disciples, as he
declared; but he did not listen, Judas the slave and deceiver.

****

The Menologion of the day and then the following notice:

On holy and great Thursday the godlike Fathers have arranged all things
well and have handed on to us that we should celebrate in turn four
events from the godlike Apostles and sacred Gospels: the sacred Washing,
the mystical Supper (that is the handing on for us of the dread
Mysteries), the transcendent Prayer and the Betrayal itself.

****

Verses for the sacred Washing

  
At evening God washed the Disciples’ feet,  
Whose foot once walked in Eden before dusk. ****

For the Mystical Supper

  
Double the Supper that Law’s Pascha brings  
And Pascha new: the Master’s Body, Blood. ****

For the transcendent Prayer

  
Prayer; and great terror, drops of blood,  
O Christ, drop from your face, as pleading to  
Escape from death, by this you cheat the foe. ****

For the Betrayal

  
What need of swords, of staves, O erring folk,  
‘Gainst one who longs to die for world’s release?

In your ineffable compassion, Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. Irmos

‘The Youths in Babylon did not tremble at the flame of the furnace, but
when cast into the midst of the flame, refreshed with dew they sang:
Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers.’

****

Troparia

Shaking his head Judas foresaw and set in motion evils, seeking an
opportunity to betray to condemnation the Judge, who is Lord of all and
God of our fathers.

To you, his friends, Christ cried, ‘One will betray me.’ Forgetting
gladness, they were gripped by grief and anguish. ‘Who is it?’ they
said, ‘Tell us, God of our fathers’.

‘The one who audaciously puts his hand in the dish with me, it were
better for him that he had never passed through the gates of life’. This
is the one he showed it to be, he the God of our fathers.

****

Katavasia

The Youths in Babylon did not tremble at the flame of the furnace, but
when cast into the midst of the flame, refreshed with dew they sang:
Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

‘The blessed young men in Babylon, accepting danger for the sake of
their ancestral laws, spat on the irrational order of the king; and
united in the fire which did not smelt them, they raised a hymn worthy
of the Mighty One: You his works praise the Lord, and highly exalt him
to all the ages.’

****

Troparia

The blessed banqueters in Sion, remaining faithful to the Word, the
Apostles followed the Shepherd like sheep, and united to Christ, from
whom they were not parted, being nourished with the divine Word, with
thanksgiving they cried: You his works praise the Lord, and highly exalt
him to all the ages.

The hateful Iscariot intentionally forgetting the law of friendship,
made ready for betrayal the feet that he had washed. And having eaten
your bread, your divine Body, he lifted up his heel against you, O
Christ, and knew not how to cry: You his works praise the Lord, and
highly exalt him to all the ages.

The one without conscience received the Body, release from sin, and the
divine Blood, poured out on behalf of the world. He did not flinch from
drinking what he had sold for a price, he was not angered by evil and he
knew not how to cry: You works praise the Lord, and highly exalt him to
all the ages.

****

Katavasia

The blessed young men in Babylon, accepting danger for the sake of their
ancestral laws, spat on the irrational order of the king; and united in
the fire which did not smelt them, they raised a hymn worthy of the
Mighty One: You works praise the Lord, and highly exalt him to all the
ages.

****

The Magnificat is not sung, but instead the 9th Ode.

Ode 9. Irmos

‘Come believers, let us enjoy the Master’s welcome and the immortal
table in the upper place, with minds raised high, having learnt a
transcendent word from the Word, whom we magnify.’

****

Troparia

‘Go’, said the Word to the Disciples, prepare for those whom I initiate
the Passover in an upper place, in which the mind is established, with
the unleavened word of truth; magnify the strength of grace’.

The Father before the ages begets the creative Wisdom, the beginning of
his ways. He created me for the works which are now being mystically
accomplished; for I the Word, being by nature uncreated, make my own the
speech of that which I have assumed.

As I am man in reality and not in mere appearance, so the nature united
to me by way of exchange is God; and so recognise me to be one single
Christ who saves the things from which and in which I have come to be.

****

Katavasia

Come believers, let us enjoy the Master’s welcome and the immortal table
in the upper place, with minds raised high, having learnt a transcendent
word from the Word whom we magnify.

****

Priest:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed and
glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints,
let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God. ****

Reader:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For all the Powers of heaven praise you, and to you we give glory,
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of ages.
****

Reader:

Amen. ****

After the small litany, the Exapostilarion sung slowly and solemnly:  
Tone 3. Model Melody.

Your bridal chamber, O my Saviour, I see all adorned, but I have no
garment so that I may enter it. Make bright the mantle of my soul, O
Giver of light, and save me\! (

**x3**) ****

At Lauds we insert 4 Idiomel Stichera.  
Tone 2

Psalm 148  

\[**A**\] Let everything that has breath praise the Lord. Praise the
Lord from the heavens; praise him in the highest. To you praise is due,
O God.

\[

**B**\] Praise him, all his angels: Praise him, all his Powers. To you
praise is due, O God.

\[

**A**\] Praise him, sun and moon; praise him, all you stars and light.

\[

**B**\] Praise him, you highest heavens and you waters that are above
the heavens. Let them praise the name of the Lord.

\[

**A**\] For he spoke and they came into being; he commanded and they
were created.

\[

**B**\] He established them for ever and ever; he made an ordinance, and
it shall not pass away.

\[

**A**\] Praise the Lord from the earth; praise him, you sea-monsters and
all deeps;

\[

**B**\] Fire and hail, snow and ice and storm-wind; things that do his
word.

\[

**A**\] Mountains and all hills, fruiting trees and all cedars;

\[

**B**\] Beasts of the wild, and all cattle, creeping things and winged
birds;

\[

**A**\] Kings of the earth and all peoples, rulers and all judges of the
earth;

\[

**B**\] Young men and maidens: old men and youths together, let them
praise the name of the Lord; for his name alone has been exalted.

\[

**A**\] His praise is above earth and heaven, and he will exalt the horn
of his people.

\[

**B**\] A hymn for all his holy ones; for the children of Israel, a
people that draws near him. ****

Psalm 149  

\[**A**\] Sing to the Lord a new song, his praise in the Church of the
holy ones.

\[

**B**\] Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let the children of
Sion be joyful in their king.

\[

**A**\] Let them praise his name in the dance; let them sing his praise
with timbrel and with harp.

\[

**B**\] For the Lord is well-pleased with his people; he will exalt the
meek with salvation.

\[

**A**\] His holy ones will exult in glory, and rejoice upon their beds.

\[

**B**\] The high praises of God in their mouths, and two-edged swords in
their hands,

\[

**A**\] To exact vengeance among the nations, punishments among the
peoples.

\[

**B**\] To bind their kings in fetters; and their nobles in shackles of
iron.

\[

**A**\] To execute upon them the judgement that is decreed; such glory
will be for all his holy ones. ****

Psalm 150  

\[**B**\] Praise God in his saints; praise him in the firmament of his
power**.**

\[

**A**\] Praise him for his mighty acts; praise him according to the
greatness of his majesty. ****

By Monk Kosmas. Tone 2

The Sanhedrin of the Jews now hurries together that it may hand over to
Pilate the Creator and Fashioner of all things. Oh, the transgressors\!
Oh, the faithless\! Because they are making ready for judgement the One
who is coming to judge the living and the dead; they are preparing for
the passion the One who cures the passions. Long-suffering Lord, great
is your mercy. Glory to you\!

\[

**B**\] Praise him with the sound of the trumpet; praise him with lute
and harp. ****

By Monk John. Same Tone.

Judas the transgressor, Lord, having dipped his hand with you in the
dish at the supper, stretched out his hands to take the silver pieces;
and having reckoned up the price of the myrrh, he did not flinch from
selling you, who are beyond price; the one who stretched out his feet to
be washed, deceitfully kissed the Master to betray him to the
transgressors; cast from the choir of Apostles, and having cast down the
thirty silver pieces, he did not see your Resurrection on the third day.
Through it have mercy on us.

\[

**A**\] Praise him with the timbrel and dances: praise him on the
strings and pipe. ****

By Monk John. Same Tone.

Judas the deceitful traitor handed over the Saviour and Lord with a
deceitful kiss; he sold to the transgressors like a slave the Master of
all things; and like a sheep to the slaughter, so the Lamb of God, the
Son of the Father, followed.

\[

**B**\] Praise him on fine-sounding cymbals: praise him on cymbals of
gladness. Let everything that has breath praise the Lord. ****

By Monk John. Same Tone.

Judas the slave and deceiver, the disciple and plotter, the friend and
accuser, was revealed by his deeds; for he followed the Teacher and
inwardly he plotted the betrayal; he said to himself, ‘I shall hand him
over and gain the money that has been contracted’; he wanted the myrrh
to be sold and Jesus to be taken by guile; he gave a kiss; he handed
over Christ; and like a sheep to the slaughter so he followed, the only
compassionate lover of humankind.

\[

**A**\] Glory. Both now. **Tone 2**

The Lamb which Isaias proclaimed is coming willingly to the slaughter,
and gives his back to scourges, his cheeks to blows; he did not turn
away his face from the shame of spittings; he is being condemned to a
disgraceful death; the Sinless accepts all things willingly, that he may
grant to all the resurrection from the dead.

****

Then the Superior says:

To you glory is due, O Lord, our God, and to you we give glory, to the
Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to
ages of ages. Amen.

Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men. We
praise you, we bless you, we worship you, we glorify you, we thank you
for your great glory. O Lord, heavenly King, God the almighty Father. O
Lord, only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit. Lord God,
lamb of God, Son of the Father, who takes away the sin of the world,
have mercy upon us, who takes away the sins of the world. Receive our
prayer, you who sit on the right hand of the Father and have mercy upon
us. For you alone are holy, you alone are Lord, Jesus Christ, to the
glory of God the Father. Amen.

Every day I will bless you, and praise your name for ever and ever. I
said, Lord, have mercy upon me; heal my soul, for I have sinned against
you. Lord, I have run to you for refuge; teach me to do your will for
you are my God. For with you is the source of life, and in your light we
shall see light. O continue your merciful kindness toward those who know
you.

Grant, Lord, this day to keep us without sin. Blessed are you, Lord, the
God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is your name for to the
ages. Amen. May your mercy, Lord, be upon us, as we have hoped in you.
Blessed are you, Lord, teach me your statutes. Blessed are you, Master,
make me understand your statutes. Blessed are you, Holy One, enlighten
me with your statutes. Lord, your mercy is for ever; do not scorn the
work of your hands. To you praise is due, to you song is due, to you
glory is due, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Priest:

Let us complete our morning prayer to the Lord. ****

Reader:

Lord, have mercy.

Help us, save, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.

That the whole day may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let us
ask the Lord.

****

Reader:

Grant this, O Lord. ****

Priest:

An Angel of peace, a faithful guide and guardian of our souls and
bodies, let us ask of the Lord.

Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.

Things good, and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let
us ask of the Lord.

That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and repentance, let
us ask of the Lord.

A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a
good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us ask.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

Reader:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For you are a God of mercies and of pity, and to you we give glory, to
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

Reader:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

For yours it is to show mercy and to save us, O our God, and to you we
give glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

After the Litany and the Prayer at the Bowing down of heads, the
Aposticha:  
Tone 8

Today the wicked Sanhedrin against Christ has assembled, and devised
vain things against him, to hand the innocent over to Pilate for death.
Today Judas places round his neck the noose of money, and is deprived of
both this transient life and of life divine. To-day Caiaphas
involuntarily prophesies, saying, ‘It is expedient that one man perish
for the people’; for he has come to suffer for our sins, that he may
free us from the slavery of the enemy, as he is good and loves
humankind.

****

Verse 1.

** He who ate my bread has lifted up his heel against me.

Today Judas conceals his pretence of love for the poor, and reveals the
form of his greed; no longer does he care for the needy, no longer does
he sell the myrrh of the sinful woman, but the heavenly Myrrh, and from
it purloins the pieces of silver; he runs to the Jews, says to the
transgressors, ‘What are you willing to give me, and I will hand him
over to you?’ O avarice of the traitor\! He concludes the sale to be
profitable; in accordance with the intention of the purchasers he
concludes the business of the One being sold; he does not haggle over
the price, but sells him like a runaway slave; for it is the custom of
thieves to cast away what is valuable; now the disciple throws what is
holy to the dogs; for the rage of avarice made him rave against the
Master; let us flee his enterprise, as we cry, ‘Long-suffering Lord,
glory to you\!’

****

Verse 2.

He went out and spoke. All my enemies whispered against me; against me
they devised evils for me.

Your manner is full of deceit, lawless Judas, for sick with avarice, you
have acquired hatred for humankind. If you loved wealth, why did you
frequent the One who taught of poverty? But if you loved him, why did
you sell the One who is beyond price, betraying him to be murdered?
Tremble sun, earth groan, and quaking cry aloud, ‘Long-suffering Lord,
glory to you\!’

****

Verse 3:

They spoke a lawless word against me, ‘Now that he sleeps, will he rise
again?’

Let no one who is uninitiated, O believers, let no one draw near
deceitfully to the table of the Master’s supper, like Judas; for he,
having received the morsel, turned against the Bread; in appearance a
disciple, but in reality present as a murderer, rejoicing with the Jews,
while supping with the Apostles; hating he kissed, kissing he sold the
One who redeemed us from the curse, the God and Saviour of our souls.

Glory.

Your manner is full of deceit, lawless Judas, for sick with avarice, you
have acquired hatred for humankind. If you loved wealth, why did you
frequent the One who taught of poverty? But if you loved him, why did
you sell the One who is beyond price, betraying him to be murdered?
Tremble sun, earth groan, and quaking cry aloud, ‘Long-suffering Lord,
glory to you\!’

Both now.

**** Tone 5.**

Initiating your disciples, Lord, you taught them, saying, ‘My friends,
see that no fear separates you from me. For though I suffer, yet it is
for the sake of the world. Do not then be scandalized because of me; for
I did not come to be served, but to serve and to give my life as a
ransom for the world. If then you are my friends, imitate me. The one
who wishes to be first, let him be last; the master like the servant.
Abide in me, that you may bear a cluster of grapes, for I am the Vine of
life.

****

Then the Superior says:

It is good to give thanks to the Lord, to sing praises to your name, O
Most High. To declare your love in the morning, and your truth every
night.

****

Reader:

Holy God, Holy Strong, Holy Immortal, have mercy on us (**three
times**).

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

All-holy Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, cleanse us from our sins.
Master, pardon our iniquities. Holy One, visit and heal our infirmities
for your name’s sake. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have mercy. Lord, have
mercy.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen

Our Father, in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come;
your will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors, and do not lead us
into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

Amen. ****

After the

Our Father**, we say the following the Apolytikion of the day.**

When the glorious disciples were enlightened at the washing of the feet,
then Judas the ungodly was stricken and darkened with the love of money;
and to lawless judges he delivered you, the just judge. O lover of
money, look upon him who for its sake hanged himself; flee from the
insatiable soul, which dared such things against the Teacher. O you who
are good to all, Lord, glory to you.

\[

**Modern Greek books often place here the Troparion of the Prophecy,
Prokeimenon and Prophecy from the First Hour.**\] ****

The litany by the Priest:

Priest:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **Three times. And so after the remaining petitions.**

Priest:

Also we pray for our Archbishop **N**.

\[Also we pray for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the royal
family, her government and all in authority.\]

Also we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation,
pardon and forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and
Orthodox Christians, those who dwell in or visit this city and parish,
the wardens and members of this church and their families; \[and for the
servants of God

**N. & N.** (**Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to
pray**), and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy though we
are.\]

Also we pray for the blessed and ever-remembered founders of this holy
church, and for all our brothers and sisters who have gone to their rest
before us, and who lie asleep here in the true faith; and for the
Orthodox everywhere\[, and for the servants of God

**N. & N**. (**Here he may name those for whom he has been asked to
pray**), and that they may be pardoned all their offences, both
voluntary and involuntary\].

Also we pray for those who bring offerings, those who care for the
beauty of this holy and venerable house, for those who labour in its
service, for those who sing, and for the people here present, who await
your great and rich mercy.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. \[**Note, this last in Athonite custom is said only
once.**\] ****

Priest:

For you, O God, are merciful and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

** Wisdom. ****

Reader:

Bless. ****

Priest:

Blessed be he who is, Christ our God, always, now and for ever and to
the ages of ages. ****

Reader:

May the Lord God strengthen the holy and pure faith of devout and
orthodox Christians, with his holy Church and this sacred Monastery,
unto ages of ages. ****

Priest:

Most holy Mother of God, save us. ****

Reader:

Greater in honour than the Cherubim, and beyond compare more glorious
than the Seraphim, without corruption you gave birth to God the Word,
truly the Mother of God we magnify you. ****

And at once he begins the First Hour.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

