\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jan-int.md) \]
\[ [1 January](1january.md) \] \[ 2 January \]
\[ [3 January](3_january.md) \] \[ [4 January](4_january.md) \]
\[ [6 January](6january.md) \] \[ [10 January](10_january.md) \]
\[ [11 January](11_january.md) \] \[ [17 January](17_january.md) \]
\[ [28 January](28_january.md) \]

****

ON THE 2ND OF THE MONTH

Forefeast of the Theophany and Commemoration of our Father among the
saints, Silvester, Pope of Rome

## .

****

AT VESPERS

****

At,

** Lord, I have cried, **we insert 6 Stichera and sing the following
Prosomia of the Forefeast.**

Tone 4. As noblest of Martyrs.

Let us devoutly intone songs for the Forefeast of the revered Baptism of
our God; for see, in flesh, as a human, he is about to approach his
Forerunner and to ask for saving Baptism for the refashioning of all
those who with faith receive sacred enlightenment and share in the
Spirit.

Christ is revealed; God appears; David wrote it clearly in prophecy; and
he comes to the slave, asking for Baptism; River Jordan, be filled with
joy. Earth and sea, hills and mountains, and hearts of mortals, all of
you now leap for joy, as you wait to receive the immaterial light.

O all-powerful, you are a river of peace and a stream of delight, as it
written; how then will a river’s streams receive you as you go down into
it naked, Lord, who wrap the heavens with clouds, stripped naked all the
evil of the foe and clothed those born of earth with incorruption.

****

\[Other Prosomia Stichera of the Saint.  
Tone 8. O marvellous wonder.\]

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 6.**

Christ the truth comes to the Jordan to be baptised by John, who says to
him, ‘I need to be baptised by you; and do you come to me? I who am
grass dare not touch the fire. But sanctify me, Master, by your divine
Epiphany’.

****

At the Aposticha, Idiomels.  
Tone 1. By Monk John.

Radiant the feast that has passed; more radiant the saving feast that
draws near. The one had a Angel as the bearer of good tidings, and this
found the Forerunner as the one who makes ready for it in advance. In
the one, when blood was shed, Bethlehem grieved, as one who was
childless; in this, when the waters were blessed, the Font was made
known as source of many children. Then a Star guided the Magi, but now
the Father revealed you to the world. Lord, who took flesh and are
coming again made manifest, glory to you\!

****

Verse:

** I will remember you from the land of Jordan and the Hermonites, from
the little mountain. \[**Psalm 41: 7**\] ****

Tone 2. By Andrew of Jerusalem.

Again my Jesus is cleansed in the Jordan, or rather cleanses our sins;
for he truly comes to Baptism, wishing to wash out Adam’s record, and he
says to John, ‘Come, Baptist, act as servant to the accomplishment of a
strange mystery. Come, quickly stretch out your hand and touch the crown
of the one who crushed the head of the dragon and opened Paradise, which
the transgression had once shut, through the deception of the serpent,
the tasting of the tree.

****

Verse:

The waters saw you, Lord. The waters saw you and were afraid. \[**Psalm
76:17**\] ****

Tone 3.

Bright was the feast that has passed, glorious the present day. In the
one Magi worshipped the Saviour; while in this one called slave baptised
the Master. There Shepherds, keeping watch, saw and marvelled; here the
voice of the Father proclaimed the only-begotten Son

Glory. Both now.

**Same Tone.**

Come, all believers, leaving Judea let us cross over the desert of
Jordan, and there let us contemplate today the one who was manifested in
flesh for our sake asking for Baptism in the streams of Jordan, the
Baptism refusing and crying out in fear, ‘I dare not with a palm of clay
lay my hands on fire. The Jordan and the sea have fled and been turned
back, my Saviour; how then shall I place my hand upon your head, at
which the Seraphim tremble? Jordan turned back when it received through
Elissaios the mantle of Elias. How will it not sink into chaos and the
deep, when it sees you naked in your streams? How, wholly aflame from
you, will it not burn me up?’ ‘Why do you hesitate, Baptist, to baptise
my Lord?’ the Jordan cries to John. ‘Why do you prevent the cleansing of
many? He sanctified all creation; let him sanctify both me and the
nature of the waters, for this he has been made manifest’.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4.

Zavoulon prepare, and make ready Nephthalim; river Jordan stand, leap
for joy as you receive the Master who comes to be baptised. Adam with
our Foremother be glad, do not hide yourselves as in Paradise of old;
for seeing you naked, he has appeared that he may put on the first robe.
Christ has appeared, as he wishes to renew the whole creation.

**(x3)** ****

AT COMPLINE

****

We sing the following Triode, of which the Acrostic is.

On Monday.

****

Ode 1. Tone 2. Irmos.

‘To the Lord who by his divine command dried up the pathless raging sea
and guided the Israelite people through it on foot let us sing; for he
has been greatly glorified’.

The ineffable condescension of the Creator shone previously from a
Virgin and shed light on the world; Christ himself again about to
accomplish another mystery, is coming for the rebirth of mortals in
Jordan.

About to act as servant of a fearful work the Forerunner, the voice of
the Word, is now drawing near to Jordan; the One rich in Godhead,
Christ, has come to make beggared Adam rich through the Spirit by the
gift of Baptism.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

‘The unwearied fire, nurtured by limitless fuel shuddered at the
unsullied body, close companion of the soul, of the docile youths, and
gave way; while as the ever-living flame died down a hymn that lives for
ever was being raised, ‘Praise the Lord, all you his works, and highly
exalt him to all the ages’’.

‘I will recognize you as my chosen vessels if the seal of my gift has
been marked on you, blazing with triple light’ says Christ the Word to
those who delay Baptism by the hesitation of sloth; for for this I have
come, granting a new way of salvation and a life of freedom.

‘The deed that is now being accomplished in you is contrary to the
natural order; for what is less is normally blessed by what is mightier.
Therefore I am afraid to lay my hand on your head’, the Forerunner cried
out to the Word, ‘It is not usual to bring grass close to fire. Do you
rather hallow me, your servant’.

****

Another Diode. Same Tone. Its acrostic is:

And on Tuesday

****

The tyrant’s decree.

Shaking off the soul’s sleep of idleness with wakefulness of heart, let
us cry out to the One who comes to cleanse souls in streams of water,
‘Bless the Lord, you works of the Lord’.

Let action in us be brought to perfection by lofty contemplation of
soul, so that appearing radiant in both we may cry out to the One who
cleanses all, ‘Bless the Lord, you his works’.

Let us the faithful, having adorned with practical reason by double
activity our talent, offer it with faith, like servants, to the Master,
who comes be baptized for the refashioning of souls.

****

Irmos.

‘The tyrant’s decree the three holy Youths did not obey, but cast into
the furnace they confessed God as they sang, ‘Bless the Lord, you works
of the Lord’’.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

‘You magnified the Mother of God who gave you birth, O Christ, from whom
you our Fashioner put on a body with feelings like ours, the ransom of
our faults. As all we generations call her blessed we magnify you’.

Having thrust aside every stain of passion, let us fittingly take up the
wise purpose of divine Baptism; for the Creator has come to give strange
cleansing by being baptized in streams of water and to show all a new
transformation.

As we contemplate Christ, willingly humbling himself even to the form of
a servant, let us now be humbled under his mighty hand, being raised up
in spirit that by pure deeds we may honour him who is being baptized.

****

Another.

As the one who contained.

Having cast aside the heavy stain of sin, let us made pure look upon the
Master who purifies all with divine streams.

Come, let us now, purified by streams of tears, draw near to Christ, who
has come to be baptized in the river Jordan.

O Saviour now accept us who have celebrated at your Nativity with Magi
and Shepherds, as we honour you who come to be baptized.

****

Irmos.

‘As the one who contained God in your womb and bore joy for the world we
sing your praise, all-holy Virgin’.

****

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.

Tone 1. Your tomb, O Saviour.

Wearing my poverty, my Jesus, you are approaching, mingling yourself
with servants, and asking for Baptism by a slave, O Lover of mankind.
Therefore, when he saw you, John cry out, ‘How shall I baptize you, who
are wholly without stain, O God supremely good?’

Glory. Both now.

**Same melody.**

Christ by his loving kindness is about to approach the streams of the
river Jordan, in which he will by grace accomplish our refashioning.
Godly Forerunner, receive him with joy and in the waters wash him as he
wills, the only Lover of mankind.

****

After the 2nd reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.

Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.

The rich through great compassion has become poor, wishing to make us
rich who have become poor through want of self-control; he is coming to
enter the streams of Jordan and to be openly baptized by John. Let us
believers sing the praise of his supreme humility.

Glory Both now.

**Same melody.**

Today the voice of Isaias has been fulfilled, who cried, \`Prepare the
way of the Lord, and make his paths; for, as he said, the desert-loving
trumpet, famous John, summons us all. And so let us hurry together and
see marvels.

****

Canon of the Forefeast, of which the Acrostic, without the Irmi, is the
Alphabet.

A Composition by Joseph.

Ode 1. Tone 2. Irmos.

‘To the Lord who by his divine decree dried up the pathless and
tempestuous sea, and guided through it the people of Israel on foot, let
us sing; for he has been greatly glorified’.

As he perceives the coming of the Lord, the godly Forerunner advances
from the wilderness, openly crying out, ‘Redemption has drawn near, has
appeared. Repent and be cleansed by water’.

Being baptized as I am in a tempest of sins, O Word without beginning
like the Father, cleanse me wholly with the sprinkling of repentance,
who ever grant redemption to believers by your baptism, through your
measureless compassion.

Country of Zavoulon, as it is written, seeing the unsetting light, be
made radiant; for see, it is present in Jordan’s streams, and sing the
praise of the God over all things, crying, ‘Let us sing to the Lord, for
he has been greatly glorified’.

Discerning the whole people drawing near, the Forerunner inspired by
God, cried out to them, ‘Who has shown you to flee from the wrath to
come? Saved by grace, produce the fruits of repentance’.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

‘Establish us in you, O Lord, who put sin to death by a tree, and plant
your fear in the hearts of us who sing your praise’.

‘Christ has appeared’, cries the Forerunner, and enters the streams of
Jordan’. Let us all go to meet him, enlightened with pure thoughts.

As you sought the one who had gone astray by trackless places, my God,
you put on richest poverty and came to be baptized, who are the
redemption of all.

Let heaven and earth now dance; the Benefactor of all is being baptized,
drowning in the waters the multitude of our measureless offences.

****

The Irmos.

‘Plant your fear, Lord, in the hearts of your servants, and be the firm
foundation of those who call on you in truth’.

****

Kathisma of the Saint.

Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

Revealed as a river of true religion, you watered the whole earth,
Silvester, with the streams of your doctrines as an inspired Hierarch;
and with the showers of your wonders you washed away the stain of
passions; and fittingly you have inherited a torrent of delight. We
therefore, assembled, devoutly honour you today with songs and
faithfully cry out to you, inspired Hierarch, ‘Intercede with Christ God
to grant forgiveness of offences to those who feast with love your holy
memory.

Glory. Both now.

**Of the Feast.**

Tone 8. You rose from the dead.

God invisible, Word incomprehensible, you were born from the Father
beyond nature and reason; while again you were born in the last times
from the Virgin, not changing what you were, and you are coming now to
be baptized in the streams of the Jordan in the flesh, who have been
well-pleased as God to save the human race.

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

‘You have come from a Virgin, not an envoy, not an Angel, but the Lord
himself incarnate, and you have saved the whole on me, mankind;
therefore I cry to you, ‘Glory to your power, O Lord’’.

The great Forerunner marvels at your coming, Jesu our Benefactor, and
abasing himself he cries, ‘You are fire, Master; do not burn me up,
Lord, who am but grass’.

‘As you see me standing in these waters, John, by my own will, now draw
near and baptize me, that through water I may contrive grace for the
human race’.

‘I knew you, my God, hidden in a body, like the sun in a cloud. How then
are you naked, now wrapping yourself in the waters?’ cried John in
amazement.

‘Human nature is made resplendent and receives redemption from the
darkness of sin, and from on high it is clothed with a divine tunic of
incorruption by my stripping myself naked’.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

‘Lord, giver of light and maker of the ages, guide us by the light of
your commands; for we know no other God but you’.

Crying, ‘Repent, the Kingdom of God has drawn near’ the sacred
Forerunner appeared from the desert, restoring us who had been deserted.

The Law of old and the company of the Prophets say, ‘Christ has come, by
baptism refashioning us who had grown old by many offences.

‘Strange and fearsome sights I see today’ says John, ‘now the source of
immortality has come forth from a little drop to ask for divine
baptism’.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

‘A final abyss of sins has surrounded me; but Lord, as you did Jonas,
bring my life up from corruption’.

Rain down on us release from sins, O Lord, who drown the faults of the
earthborn in the streams of the Jordan through your great mercy.

O Christ, who are an ocean of righteousness, you now draw near to drown
the dragon in the river Jordan and to wash away Adam’s transgression.

‘How will a river’s streams contain you, O Christ, who are truly a
stream of incorruption?’ cried the Forerunner, glorifying your great
compassion.

****

The Irmos.

‘I will pour out my entreaty to the Lord and to him I will declare my
afflictions; for my soul has been filled with evils and my life has
drawn near to Hades; and like Jonas I beg, \`O God, bring me up from
corruption’’.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4.

Today you have appeared.

Today the Lord has come to the streams of Jordan, and cries aloud to
John, ‘Do not be afraid to baptise me; for I have come to save Adam the
First-formed’.

****

The Ikos.

****

‘

I am not requiring you, O Baptist, to go beyond the limits; I do not say
to you, ‘Say to me what you said to the lawless, what you urged on the
sinners. Only baptize me in silence, and await what comes by Baptism.
For through this you will acquire a dignity that has not been given to
the Angels; for I will make you greater than all the Prophets. Not one
of them saw me clearly, but only in types and shadows and dreams; while
you see me standing by you of set purpose, for I have come to save Adam
the First-formed’. ****

Another, of the Saint.

Tone 4. Seeking the things on high.

Having filled your mouth with the wisdom of God, you made clear to us
the knowledge of the Trinity and cast down the godlessness of tyrants
with the sling of your words, Silvester. And so entreat the Lord on our
behalf.

****

The Ikos.

Enriched with the throne of the Prince of the Apostles, you were
revealed as a most wondrous Minister of God, making lovely, establishing
and magnifying the Church by divine doctrines. Like a star blazing with
light you give light by the light of virtues and teach us to reverence
the Trinity as one undivided Godhead; and you drove out the heresies of
the ill-intentioned, all-wise Silvester. And so entreat the Lord on our
behalf.

****

Synaxarion.

On the 2nd of the same month, Commemoration of our Father among the
Saints Silvester, Pope of Rome.

****

Verses.

  
Magus Zambres he shames, a dead ox lives,  
Silvester, Pope of Rome, though dead yet lives.  
And on the month’s second day Pope Silvester breathed out his last
breath.

On the same day, Commemoration of the holy Bishop and Martyr, Theagenes.

****

Verses.  

Theagenes, be cast into the deep;  
Though drowned therein, you swim out to the stars.

On the same day Saints Theopemptos and Theodoti, the mother of the holy
Unmercenaries, died in peace.

****

Verses

.  
To loose Theopemptos from bonds of flesh,  
Spirits of fire, sent by God \[Theou pempsantos\], drew near.

By sickness Theodoti passed from life,  
Who bore to life healers of sicknesses.

On the same day, the Venerable Mark the Deaf died in peace.

****

Verses.

  
No words of earthly utterance did Mark hear,  
Before he left earth bringing ears from earth.

On the same day Commemoration of the holy Martyr Basil of Ankyra.

****

Verses.

  
The roar, the gaping maw, the bite of beasts  
Saint Basil’s meekness did not quail before.

On the same day Saint Sergios died by the sword.

****

Verses.

  
It is not possible to say, or knowledge bear  
With what joy Sergios had his head cut off.

On the same day Saint Theopistos was stoned to death.

****

Verses.

  
A multitude of faithless \[apistôn\] basely urged  
Slew you with stones, faithful \[pisté\] Theopistos.

On the same day Commemoration of our Venerable Father Kosmas, Archbishop
of Constantinople, the Wonderworker, of the revered Monastery of Chora.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

‘When the golden image was being worshipped on the plain of Deïra, your
three Youths trampled down the godless decree. Cast into the midst of
the fire they were bedewed as they sang, ‘Blessed are you, the God of
our Fathers’’.

By the wealth of your loving kindness, O Christ, you chose to approach
the waters naked, so clothing me, stripped naked by the treachery of the
Boaster, with a sacred robe. I sing the praise of your compassion and I
worship your wondrous dispensation.

‘What is this great dispensation of yours towards us, O Christ? What
this poverty? What this ineffable condescension beyond understanding?’
said John when he saw you stripping yourself naked and commanding that
you be baptized by him.

You set alight, like a lamp, your sacred flesh in the midst of Jordan
and sought out the image which had been befouled by sin and the
passions; and when you had found it you made it fait by your Baptism,
loving Lord, therefore we sing your praise.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

‘The God who descended into the furnace of fire to the Hebrew Youths and
changed the flame to dew, all you his works sing his praise as Lord, and
highly exalt him to all the ages’.

A Voice crying clearly in the wilderness, John came, turning back hearts
that fervently repent to glorify the Saviour and Master as he appears in
the Jordan.

Seeking to dry up the streams of the enemy’s wickedness, to repel the
seas of the passions and to pour out pardon and forgiveness for the
faithful, Master, you are coming to be baptized in the streams of
Jordan.

Maker of hours and times, through compassion become subject to time, who
shone out timelessly from the Father who is before eternity, you have
come to wash away the time-old faults of all in the streams of Jordan.

****

Irmos.

‘By grace become victors over tyrant and flame, the Youths who held fast
to your commandments cried out, ‘Bless the Lord all you his works, and
highly exalt him to all the ages’’.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

‘The Word, God from God, who has come with ineffable wisdom to renew
Adam, terribly fallen by eating to corruption, for us ineffably
incarnate from a holy Virgin, with one accord in hymns we the faithful
magnify him’.

When John saw you, O Benefactor, coming to him and in humility asking
Baptism from you, he was amazed and drew back, in no way daring to touch
with his hand the One who touches all the mountains and they smoke.

Like a holy swallow, harbinger of spiritual spring, the Baptist came to
those in the winter of unnumbered faults and ever enduring the
tempestuous gale of hostile spirits with most wicked passions.

Seeing your fruitlessness the axe of death laid to your roots as to tree
threatens to fell you; do not then continue fruitless, my soul, but cry
out to God with fervent repentance, ‘I have sinned, save me’.

The voice of one who cried was heard in desert hearts, ‘Be glad, Christ
has come granting forgiveness to all. Be hallowed every sea, springs and
rivers, valleys and lakes and all that lies beneath the sun.

****

Irmos.

‘We who have been saved through you, pure Virgin, confess you to be
indeed Mother of God, as with the Bodiless choirs we magnify you’.

****

Exapostilarion.  
Women listen.

The voice of one who cries has sounded; you hills, leap for joy; dance,
human race, for the Word before eternity, taking flesh as a man, has
come that he may be baptized in Jordan by hands which he fashioned and
to abolish the sin of the world.

****

Same melody.

How will a river’s streams receive you, Lover of mankind, who made from
nothing rivers and seas? How will the Forerunner dare to lay his hand on
your immaculate head, Master? Trembling we sing the praise, O Word, of
the height of your poverty.

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Stichera and sing Prosomia, of which the acrostic,
until the 5th of the month, is:

Song of Theophanes for the Lights.

****

Tone 8. The Angelic Powers.

Go on, Angelic Powers, from Bethlehem to Jordan’s streams. Leaving the
wilderness behind. John draw near. River rejoice and make ready. Let all
the earth be glad. Christ is coming to cleanse the sin of Adam, as he is
compassionate.

With pure mouths and souls made clean, come, let us mystically pass over
from Bethlehem and hastening with Christ to the Jordan let us, all the
tribes of the earth, now sing to him as we say with faith, ‘Blessed is
our God who has come; glory to you’.

Great and fearful is the mystery\! That God has been made like humans
and wholly without knowledge of sin the guiltless today asks to be
baptized by John in the river Jordan. Blessed is our God who has
appeared; glory to you\!

A flower from David, which blossomed from the Virgin, Christ has come to
the streams of Jordan to wash away the sins of the Forefather in the
waters. Adam, dance; Eve rejoice; let heaven be glad; let peoples say,
\`Blessed is our God who has come; glory to you’.

Glory.

**Same melody.**

Fearing to place his hand, with his hand he trembles; with his soul John
rejoices, understanding that you have been well-pleased to incline your
head, for you have taken the form of a slave, that you may deliver
mortals from the slavery of the foe, as they cry, ‘Blessed is our God
who has come; glory to you’.

Both now.

**Same melody.**

Let the whole earth mystically rejoice and let the mountains
prophetically leap for joy; Jordan’s stream, turn back, as it is
written; tremble before the face of the Master; because God, become man,
has come to cleanse all mortals of the sin of Adam.

****

Aposticha. Idiomel Stichera. Tone 6.

The feast of Christ’s Nativity that has passed was more radiant than the
sun; the feast of his divine Epiphany that is coming is resplendent and
full of light. In the former Shepherds, giving glory with Angels,
worshipped God become man, while in this John touched the Master with
his right hand and said with fear, ‘Sanctify me and the waters, O you
who alone have great mercy’.

****

Verse:

I will remember you from the land of Jordan and the Hermonites, from the
little mountain.

River Jordan prepare, for see Christ God is coming to be baptized by
John, that by his Godhead he may crush the invisible heads of the
dragons in your waters. Wilderness of Jordan rejoice; mountains leap for
joy with gladness, for eternal life has come to call back Adam. Voice of
one who cries, Forerunner John, shout aloud, ‘Prepare the ways of the
Lord and make straight his paths’.

****

Verse:

The waters saw you, O God, the waters saw you and were afraid.

Let the wilderness of Jordan rejoice and flower like a lily; for the
voice of one who cries has been heard in it, ‘Prepare the way of the
Lord’; for the One who weighed the mountains with a balance and the
valleys with a level, the One who fills all things as God is being
baptized by a slave. The One who distributes rich gifts of grace has
begun to make himself poor. Eve heard, ‘In pains you will give birth to
children’, but now the Virgin has heard, ‘Hail, full of grace, the Lord
is with you who has great mercy’.

Glory. Both now.

****

Tone 8. By Anatolios.

‘John Baptist, who in the womb recognized me the Lamb, be my servant in
the river, minister to me with Angels; stretch out to touch my
immaculate head with your palm; and when you see the mountains tremble
and Jordan being turned back, shout with them, ‘Lord, incarnate from a
Virgin for our salvation, glory to you\!’’

****

The rest of the Office of Matins as usual, and Dismissal.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

