\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](july1.md) \] \[ July 5 \]
\[ [20 July](20july.md) \] \[ [22 July](22july.md) \]
\[ [Holy Fathers](holy_fathers.md) \]

ON THE 5TH OF THE SAME MONTH

Commemoration of our Venerable and Godbearing Father Athanasios of
Athos; and of our Venerable Father Lampados the Wonderworker.

**AT VESPERS**

****

The 1st Section of

Blessed is the man. **At** Lord, I have cried **we insert 6 Prosomia of
St Athanasios, doubling them.**

Tone 2.

What panegyrics of praise may we offer to Athanasios? By his actions
fairly adorned, richly supplied with graces poured from the bright
radiance of God; the sword who cuts down the assaults of the passions;
the pillar ablaze with contemplation; the lamp of self-mastery who
radiates from the lamp of his soul the commands of God, who grants life
to all.

With what garlands of words may we paltry creatures garland Athanasios?
The falcon who flies heavenwards, lifted soaring on godlike wings of
contemplation; the impregnable tower of humility; the unshakeable wall
of discernment; the honoured beauty of the fair adornment of virtues;
the one who on behalf of his children implores Christ God the only
compassionate

By the torch of your gifts of grace, Venerable Father Athanasios,
inspired by God, you were revealed as an ever-radiant dawn, drawing
towards the day-break that knows no evening those who are blinded by the
fog of the passions; and so, as one who has multiplied his talent,
Christ has declared you to be a healer of souls who lances the
putrefaction of incurable wounds with the sword of your words, and
grants saving strength to those who approach you.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

Your life was filled with God, your end was all-holy, Father Athanasios,
for by it the whole multitude of the Mountain was assembled and when
they saw you lying lifeless on a bier they cried out with mournful
words: Grant a final word to your servants, O Saint; tell us, how have
you abandoned your children, Father, the children whom you pitied as a
father, truly full of sympathy and tender love. But even though here you
are hidden in the tomb, we who honour you with love are enriched with
you as protector and advocate on high with God.

****

Theotokion

.

Who will not call you blessed, All-holy Virgin? Who will not hymn your
child-birth without labour? For the only-begotten Son, who shone from
the Father beyond time, came forth from you, pure Maiden, ineffably
incarnate. By nature he is God, by nature he became man for our sakes,
not divided in a duality of persons, but known without confusion in a
duality of natures. O honoured and all-blest, implore him to have mercy
on our souls.

****

Entrance,

O Joyful Light, **Prokeimenon of the day and the Readings.**

The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[

**3:1-9**\]

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no torment will
ever touch them. In the eyes of the foolish they seem to have died, and
their departure was reckoned to be a disaster, and their going from us
to be their destruction; but they are at peace. For though in the sight
of others they were punished, their hope is full of immortality. Having
been disciplined a little, they will receive great good, because God
tested them and found them worthy of himself; like gold in the furnace
he tried them, and like a sacrificial burnt offering he accepted them.
In the time of their visitation they will shine forth, and will run like
sparks through the stubble. They will judge nations and hold sway over
peoples, and the Lord will reign over them for ever. Those who trust in
him will understand truth, and the faithful will abide with him in love,
because grace and mercy are upon his Holy Ones, and he watches over his
elect.

The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[

**5:15-6:3**\]

The righteous live for ever, and their reward is with the Lord; the Most
High takes care of them. Therefore they will receive the crown of glory
and the diadem of beauty from the hand of the Lord, because with his
right hand he will cover them, and with his arm he will shield them. He
will take his zeal as his whole armour and will arm all creation to
repel his enemies; he will put on justice as a breastplate, and wear
impartial judgement as a helmet; he will take holiness as an invincible
shield, and sharpen stern wrath for a sword, and creation will join with
him to fight against his frenzied foes. Shafts of lightning will fly
with true aim, and will leap from the clouds to the target, as from a
well-drawn bow, and hailstones full of wrath will be hurled as from a
catapult; the water of the sea will rage against them, and rivers will
relentlessly overwhelm them; a mighty wind will rise against them, and
like a tempest it will winnow them away. Lawlessness will lay waste the
whole earth, and evil-doing will overturn the thrones of the mighty.
Listen therefore, O kings, and understand; learn, O judges of the ends
of the earth. Give ear, you that hold sway over multitudes, and boast of
crowds of nations. For your dominion was given you from the Lord, and
your sovereignty from the Most High.

The Reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.\
\[

**4:7-15**\]

The righteous, though he die early, will be at rest. For old age is not
honoured for length of time, or measured by number of years; but
understanding is grey hair for anyone, and a blameless life is ripe old
age. He became well pleasing to God and was loved by him, and while
living among sinners he was taken up. He was caught up so that evil
might not change his understanding or guile deceive his soul. For the
fascination of wickedness obscures what is good, and roving desire
perverts the innocent mind. Being made perfect in a short time, he
fulfilled long years; for his soul was pleasing to the Lord, therefore
he took him quickly from the midst of wickedness. Yet the peoples saw
and did not understand, or take such thing to heart, that God’s grace
and mercy are with his elect, and that he watches over his holy ones.

****

At the Aposticha, Prosomia.\
Tone 5.

Hail venerable Athanasios, companion of angelic choirs; for you truly
led their life on earth, all-blessed Father, practising virtue and
appearing as an unsullied mirror of purity, receiving the blazing beams
of the Holy Spirit; therefore shining brightly you saw the future,
foretelling all, initiated from the divine illumination of Christ;
implore him that our souls be given his great mercy.

****

Verse:

Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saint.

Hail prince and invincible champion of ascetics; for having cut out the
roots of the passions and bravely withstood the assaults of the demons,
Athanasios, you triumphed over their soul-destroying error; while you
revealed the force and unconquerable power of the Cross of the Saviour.
Girded with this power you conquered all those who reject the divine
manifestation of Christ in the flesh; implore him that our souls be
given his great mercy.

****

Verse:

Blessed is the man who fears the Lord.

A well-fixed pillar of virtues radiant with light and an overshadowing
cloud, you appeared leading those on Athos who love God from earth to
heaven, as you break open the sea of the passions with the staff of the
Cross. You wounded the spiritual Amalek and found the unimpeded path to
heaven and an inviolate lot, O Blest by God, as you stand joyfully with
the Bodiless Powers before the throne of Christ; implore him that our
souls be given his great mercy.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

As we hasten together, O lovers of festivals, let us honour with songs
of praise the beauty of the Fathers, the glory of ascetics, the spring
of marvels and unashamed intercessor with God as we say: Hail, rule and
model, most precise pattern of the monastic life. Hail, most brilliant
of beacons, who light up the whole world with the torches of virtues.
Hail, great advocate and pains and fervent protector of those in
troubles. And therefore, Athanasios, do not cease to intercede with
Christ God on behalf of this flock of yours, and of all the faithful who
honour your revered falling asleep.

Both now.

Mother of God, you are the true vine who gave bud to the fruit of life;
we implore you, Sovereign Lady, intercede together with the Apostles and
all the Saints that he have mercy on our souls.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 3

.

The ranks of Angels were amazed by your life in the flesh, how with a
body you were capable of invisible wrestlings and wounded the regiments
of the demons; therefore, Athanasios, Christ has repaid you with rich
gifts. And so, Father, intercede with Christ God that our souls may be
saved.

Glory. Both now.

Virgin Mother of God, we hymn you as the means of the salvation of our
race; for your Son and our God, who through the Cross accepted suffering
in the flesh he had taken from you, has redeemed us from corruption, for
he loves humankind.

**AT MATINS**

****

After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.\
Tone 4.

Taking up his Cross on your shoulders, you devoutly followed Christ by
ascetic deeds, venerable Athanasios; and you have become a model for all
monastics who in holiness live the ascetic life, glorious Father. But
now that by godly trials you have attained the palaces above do not
cease to intercede for the salvation of our souls.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Like the Prophet I cry out to you: Do not enter into judgement with me,
O Christ; for I know that my faults accuse me, and I cry out to you:
Have mercy at the prayers of her who bore on me, humble and unworthy, as
you did on the Thief and the Harlot, the Prodigal and the Publican, O
Lover of mankind; for you did not come to save the just, but rather
those who had fallen.

****

After the 2nd reading from the Psalter, Kathisma.\
Tone 4.

Through godly deeds and a pure life you were well pleasing to the Lord,
Venerable Father; and you have been found worthy of the inheritance of
the Bodiless Powers, wise Athanasios.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Invincible protection of those in need and ready intercession of those
who hope in you, deliver me from dangers and do not despise me, O help
of all.

****

Psalm 50 and the Canons.

The Canon of St Athanasios, of which the acrostic is:

\
As I hymn Athanasios, I shall praise his virtue. Amen. ****

Ode 1. Tone 8.

Immortality became your name and while still in life you appeared as a
partaker of true immortality, passing beyond transient things. But as
you stand before Christ remember us who remember you.

Devout from childhood, the loss of parents in no way hindered you from
acquiring virtue, but you turned all your love and all your desire
entirely towards the Creator alone.

From impure lips I dare to sing to you in praise, possessed with longing
for you and prisoner of love. But, Father, be forgiving and make me
worthy to bring you this song of praise.

****

Theotokion.

You gave birth beyond reason to a little child, the Ancient of Days, who
showed new paths of virtue upon earth; wounded with love for him, O
Maiden, your renowned servant Athanasios framed this house for you.

****

Ode 3.

 

From a child you were seized with love for God, collecting round you
children of your own age and forming them into a band you trained them
spiritually, most wisely weaning them from childish ways.

Smitten with love of wisdom, you reached the fair city of Constantine, O
God-inspired; and like a wise, melodious bee you gathered seasonable
words and abandoned what was superfluous.

Piloting your spiritual ship, blest Father, with the sail of the Cross
you accomplished shrewdly and nimbly the difficult voyage of life and
you were brought to the divine havens of calm.

****

Theotokion.

He who was ineffably begotten of the Father before the ages, in the last
times came forth from your womb and made our nature divine, O Virgin
Mother, conspicuously bringing to himself the companies of the ascetics.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8.

\
The Wisdom and Word

From your youth you abandoned all the perishable and pleasant things of
life, keenly following the One who called you, venerable Father; and
taking the Cross on your shoulders, as you had heard, you wasted your
body away by fasts; therefore the All-loving Lord chose you well as
shepherd of his own sheep, Venerable Athanasios. Intercede with Christ
God to grant forgiveness of offences to those who celebrate with love
your holy memory.

****

Theotokion.

The Wisdom and Word you conceived in your womb unburned, O Mother of
God, and you bore for the world the One who possesses the world; from
your breasts you suckled the One who nourishes all; in your embrace you
held the One who carries all things; therefore I implore you, All-holy
Virgin, to be delivered from my offences when I am about to stand before
the face of my Creator. O Lady, pure Virgin, grant me then your help;
for I your servant have you as my hope.

****

Ode 4.

Making your mind ruler of the passions and guided by inspired deeds you
accomplished the good way and devoutly drove off the ambushes,
villainies and knaveries of the demons, wisely choosing the better part.

You submitted to the light yoke of Christ and instructed by fear of God
and purified in body and soul you became an argument of purity and
sobriety, a definition of self-control, a seal of dispassion and an
image of love, Athanasios.

Having shared in our own culture and that which is from without, with
great love of wisdom you distinguished in each that which is suitable
and advantageous, fortified by justice, wisdom, humility, understanding
and courage, and conspicuous by the other gifts of grace.

****

Theotokion.

Carried with awe on the backs of the Cherubim, the Master dwelt in your
womb, Pure Virgin, as on a throne of fire, and by assuming flesh he made
human nature divine, as Athanasios, famed among ascetics, teaches, O
only all-praised.

****

Ode 5.

 

You appeared as a lode-stone, Father, by the sweetness of your words
drawing to the teaching and hearing of your instructions those who
desire to see and look on your revered and gracious face.

Yielding to divine laws and obedient to the commands of their Maker, you
appeared as a lawgiver and most strict rule for monks, teacher of the
foolish, guide of the erring and beacon of those in darkness, honoured
Father.

Mould of virtues and vessel of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, you built a
sacred and pleasant place of learning, setting out the whole conduct and
way of life suitable for monks.

****

Theotokion.

The mouth of rhetors has not strength to sing you, O All-praised, who
are higher than the Cherubim and all creation; and so with godlike
Athanasios intercede with the Master on behalf of us all.

****

Ode 6.

By your toils you slew the desires of the flesh, you crucified yourself
to the world and the passions, as by fasts and tears, prayers and hymns
you waited on God.

Prince of monks on Mount Athos, type and model of virtuous deeds, you
adorned all the dwellings there of the unwedded.

Pleasant, upright and good, fair and moderate, accessible, gentle,
merciful, sympathetic and compassionate and cheerful you were in your
ways, and by your conduct an imitator of Christ.

****

Theotokion.

Revealed as a new Moses, you made ready another tabernacle, a sheepfold,
All-honoured Father; and you increased it by toils and sweat and
dedicated it to the Mother of God.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8.

To you, my Champion.

As noblest contemplator of the immaterial beings and truest ascetic
teacher we your flock praise you and we cry: Do not cease to intercede
with the Lord that they may be delivered from trials and dangers those
who cry out to you: Hail Father Athanasios!

****

The Ikos.

Accepting your call from above you have inherited immortal life; for
with a body upon earth you shared the life of the Bodiless Ones and
became impregnable to the passions; and so we praise you Father:\
Hail, bright glory of monks; hail, radiant monument of sobriety.\
Hail, far seen token of courage; hail, proof of all-wise prudence.\
Hail, balanced line of accurate justice; hail, who by reason order the
impulses of duties.\
Hail, mind who enjoy ineffable thoughts; hail, who devoutly perceive all
creation.\
Hail, through whom the demons are shamed; hail through whom every
passion is slain.\
Hail, haven of those in the tempest of life; hail saviour of those who
faithfully cry to you:\
Hail, Father Athanasios!

****

Synaxarion.

On the 5th of the same month, Commemoration of our Venerable and
godbearing Father Athanasios of Athos.

****

Verses.\

Anthony was Great, the beginning of Fathers;\
Athanasios godlike, their godly end.\
Though Athanasios came but late in time\
Yet he excelled the ancients by his toils.\
For Athanasios and disciples six\
Temple’s collapse destroyed their bodies’ temples.\
And on the fifth of the month Spirits brought Athanasios to God’s town.

On the same day, Commemoration of our venerable Father Lampados.

****

Verses

.\
Filling his lamp with oil now Lampados\
Was ready for the Bridegroom drawing near.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7.

The sound of your way of life and your achievements has gone out into
nearly all creation, Father, and reached the glorious height of God who
glorified you and made you spoken of to all.

Forethought for the poor, defender of widows, provider for orphans,
swift consolation of the sad, defence of the wronged, you have become,
Father, as you imitate your Teacher.

Universal star and unsetting beacon of monks, helper in need, great
refuge of sinners: as these I know you, and I present you, All-honoured,
as mediator and advocate with the Master, Christ.

****

Theotokion.

Your servant, Mother of God, as he longed to see the ineffable glory of
your Son and God, took up the precious Cross and followed in his
life-bearing and divine footsteps.

****

Ode 8.

As a youth, Athanasios, you routed the principalities and powers of
darkness and became a great teacher and saving guide, unveiling their
assaults, their ambushes and their wiles, and guarding your untended
flock from the malice of the demons.

Living as man on earth you truly gained the commonwealth of heaven,
revealed as a companion of Angels and living their way of life; with
them you now sing out: Priests bless, people highly exalt Christ to the
ages.

Assembled today we rightly honour you and reverence the casket of your
relics, asking by your prayers release from passions and forgiveness of
sins, deliverance from every calamity and danger as we celebrate with
faith and joy your holy memory to the ages.

****

Theotokion.

As Elias of old dwelt on Carmel, so he too dwelt on Mount Athos,
devoting himself with longing to be by himself with God; and irradiated
by divine graces of contemplation he was declared to be the servant of
the pure Mother of God, as with the Archangel he cried to her:Hail!

****

Ode 9.

When you had perfected, as though without flesh upon earth, purity,
sobriety and a pure and unsullied way of life and conduct, you hastened
to heavenly abodes and you rejoice together with all the saints and just
as you implore Christ on behalf of all.

Greatly you magnified on earth your own Master and by your own limbs
through contemplation and activity you glorified him and appeared as
glorious and you became admired by all, godbearing Father; for the enemy
knew truly to respect your virtue.

You were united with the armies of the Bodiless Powers and numbered with
the choirs of saints, and you join in the dance with all the elect,
partaking in the true life of God and in immortal life, O Father; with
them intercede with your Master unremittingly for your flock.

****

Theotokion.

As you are a hallowed temple which contained one of the Trinity, O Lady,
your servant Athanasios raised a fair and holy temple to your glory and
honour, in which do not cease without ceasing to grant your support by
your prayers.

****

Exapostilarion.

You dawned resplendent, bearing light, from the regions of the East and
enlightened the regions of the West, Athanasios, by the radiance of your
virtues; but do not cease to to intercede for the world to the Lord.

****

Theotokion.

All-shining universal Queen, at the supplications of honoured Athanasios
guard untouched by any hostility your flock which ever sings your
praise, the protection of the world.

****

At Lauds we insert 6 Stichera, and we sing the following prosomia,
doubling the 1st.

Tone 8.

Truly the death of your Saint was precious in your sight, O Christ; for
see, from his foot your servant made a spring of blood gush out and
after death it drives out every kind of sickness and puts to flight the
spirits of wickedness with which, while still alive, he had battled to
shedding of blood.

All-wise Athanasios, the Lord has revealed the casket of your relics as
a source of wonders and a river of gifts for mortals; it grants sight to
the blind, cures leprosy, and elephantiasis; delivers those possessed by
unclean spirits from their power and makes them sane.

Hail, glory of ascetics, star of monks, boast of shepherds, Father
Athanasios, companion of the Saints; hail, source of love and soberness;
hail, dwelling of the Trinity; hail, radiant lamp of discernment, hail
straightest rule of virtues, and living boundary-stone.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

Let us all praise the one whose name means Immortality, who lived as an
ascetic bravely and nobly on Athos; who gathered this flock and with
love raised up a house to the Lord and dedicated it to the Mother of
God; with her he intercedes for us who with faith celebrate his memory.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Mother of God, you are the true vine who gave bud to the fruit of life;
we implore you, Sovereign Lady, intercede together with the Apostles and
all the Saints that he have mercy on our souls.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
