\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \]
\[ [Baptism](baptism.md) \] \[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \]
\[ [Consecration of a Church](dedic-int.md) \]
\[ Liturgy of Saint James \] \[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \]
\[ [Canon for Confession](canon_for_confession.md) \]
\[ [Presanctified](presanctified.md) \]
\[ [Ordinations](ordinations.md) \]

INTRODUCTION
------------

The Divine Liturgy of St James, which was until recently only celebrated
on the island of Zakynthos on his feast on 23 October and in Jerusalem
on the Sunday after Christmas, is today celebrated in an increasing
number of Orthodox churches. It was the ancient rite of Jerusalem, as
the Mystagogic Catecheses of St Cyril of Jerusalem imply. It is still,
in its Syrian form, the principal liturgy of the Syrian Oriental Church,
both in Syriac and, in the ancient Syrian Orthodox Church of India, in
Malayalam and English.

This version of the Greek Liturgy of St James is highly provisional and
tentative, principally because none of the editions available agree
among themselves. The only critical edition is the one published by Dom
B.-Ch. Mercier in volume 26 of the Patrologia Orientalis in 1950. This
is extremely detailed and learned, but totally unusable as a practical
edition, which it was not intended to be. Other scholarly editions can
be found in Swainson’s ‘Greek Liturgies’ \[1884\] and in Brightman’s
‘Liturgies Eastern and Western’ \[1896\]. Neale and Littledale published
an English translation in their ‘Translations of the Primitive
Liturgies’ \[1859\], which rather charmingly suggests in one or two
footnotes that St Paul actually quotes from it in his Epistles.
‘Practical’ editions of the Greek have been issued by the Apostoliki
Diakonia in Athens and by Holy Cross in the United States \[1988\]. The
latter contains a parallel English translation. Both these editions are
heavily abbreviated and seriously ‘byzantinised’. A Slavonic version of
the Greek, made by Father Philip Gardner, was authorised by the Russian
Church Abroad in 1938. This was translated into hyper-Cranmerian
English, which even extends to the Introduction, by the Monastery of St
Mark of Ephesus in New Jersey forty years later. This version is more
than abundantly supplied with very detailed, but sometimes
contradictory, rubrics, though where these come from is unclear. Like
the two modern Greek editions, the Liturgy is abbreviated and
byzantinised.

The present translation is based on Mercier’s edition and tries as far
as possible to give a reliable version of the best text available.
Since, however, it was also made for actual use, the extremely long
commemoration of the Saints towards the end of the Anaphora has been
drastically curtailed. On the other hand it preserves a number of what
are probably ‘doublets’ of prayers in the manuscripts. It should be
noted that the rite of the Fraction supposes that a ‘Syrian’ type of
prosphora is being used. That is to say a small, flattish loaf about
three inches in diameter, rather than the standard Byzantine prosphora.
The fraction is also made easier if the seal used is of the Syrian type,
divided into sections and covered with small crosses.

I hope to revise this version in the near future and to complete it by
the addition of the long catalogue of Saints. What is here offered is so
in the hope that the magnificent prayers of this ancient Liturgy may
become more widely known both inside and outside the Church.

****

THE DIVINE LITURGY OF JAMES THE APOSTLE AND BROTHER OF GOD

ORDER, WITH GOD’S HELP, AND SERVICE OF THE SACRED RITE ACCORDING TO THE
HOLY SYNAXIS

****

Prayer of the Prothesis

****

In the skevophylakion the Priest says:

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, the one,
simple and undivided Trinity, that unites and sanctifies us through
itself, and brings peace to our lives, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages. Amen.

****

Then, imploring the Deity on his own behalf, the priest says:

Defiled as I am by many sins, do not utterly reject me, Master, Lord,
our God. For see, I draw near to this divine and heavenly mystery, not
as though I were worthy, but, looking to your goodness, I raise my voice
to you, ‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner. For I have sinned against
heaven and before you, and I am not worthy to lift up my eyes to this
your sacred and spiritual Table, on which your only-begotten Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, is mystically set forth as a sacrifice by me, a
sinner stained by every defilement. Therefore I bring you this
supplication, that your Spirit, the Advocate, may be sent down to me,
strengthening and preparing me for this ministry. And grant that without
condemnation the word that has been declared by you may be proclaimed by
me to the people in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom you are blessed,
together with your all-holy, good, life-giving and consubstantial
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Before the Royal Doors, as the clergy are about to make the Entrance,
the Priest says aloud:

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit, the triple
and single light of the one Godhead, that exists singly in Trinity and
is divided without division. For the one God is Trinity, whose glory the
heavens declare, while earth proclaims his dominion, the sea his might
and every physical and immaterial creature his greatness. For to him
belongs all glory, honour, might, greatness and magnificence, now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

People:

Amen. ****

Then the Priest begins the prayers of the Enarxis (aloud).

Benefactor and King of the ages, and Fashioner of all creation, accept
your Church, which approaches you through your Christ. Fulfil what is
profitable for each, bring all to perfection, and make us worthy of the
grace of your sanctification, gathering us together in your Holy,
Catholic and Apostolic Church, which you gained by the blood of your
only-begotten Son, our Lord and saviour, Jesus Christ, with whom you are
blessed and glorified, together with your all-holy, good and life-giving
Spirit, now and forever, and to the ages of ages.

****

Deacon:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Prayer of the Incense at the Entrance

****

Priest, aloud:

O God, who accepted the gifts of Abel, the sacrifices of NoÃ« and
Abraham, the incense of Aaron and Zachary, accept from the hands of us
sinners this incense for a sweet fragrance and forgiveness of our sins
and those of all your people. For you are blessed and to you belongs
glory, to the Father with your only-begotten Son and your all-holy, good
and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

The Deacon censes and begins the

Only-begotten Son**, and the Singers chant the Troparion for the
Entrance of the clergy with the holy Gospel.**

The Singers:

Only-begotten Son and Word of God, who, being immortal, accepted for our
salvation to take flesh from the holy Mother of God and Ever-Virgin
Mary, and without change became man; you were crucified, Christ God, by
death trampling on death, being one of the Holy Trinity, glorified with
the Father and the Holy Spirit: save us! ****

When those making the entrance reach the middle of the church, where a
vima \[platform\] has been set up, they place the holy Gospel on it, and
go towards the sanctuary. The Priest, standing in front of the holy
Doors, says, aloud:

Almighty God, Lord, whose name is great, who give us entrance to the
Holy of Holies through the coming of your only-begotten Son, our Lord
and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, we entreat and implore your goodness.
Since we are full of fear and trembling as we are about to stand before
your holy altar, send forth your good grace upon us, sanctify our souls,
bodies and spirits and change our thoughts to true devotion, so that,
with a pure conscience, we may offer you gifts, presents, fruits, for
the removal of our sins, for the forgiveness of all your people, by the
grace and love for humankind of your only-begotten Son, with whom you
are blessed, together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit,
now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

People:

Amen. ****

And the Priest enters the sanctuary.

Facing the People, the Deacon says:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

****

People (after each petition):

Lord, have mercy.

For the peace from on high, God’s love for humankind, and the salvation
of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world and the union of all the holy churches
of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For the salvation and of our most holy Father and Archbishop

**N.**, all the clergy and Christ-loving people, let us pray to the
Lord.

For the forgiveness of our sins and pardon of our offences, and for us
to be delivered from all affliction, wrath, danger, constraint and
assault of enemies, let us pray to the Lord.

Let us call to mind our most holy, pure, most glorious and blessed Lady,
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, of the holy, glorious Prophet,
Forerunner and Baptist John, of the holy, godlike and all-praised
Apostles, of the glorious Prophets and victorious Martyrs and all the
holy and just, that by their prayers and intercessions we may all find
mercy.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

The Priest bows and says in a low voice

****

The Prayer of the Trisagion

Compassionate and merciful, long-suffering, most merciful and true Lord,
look down from your holy dwelling-place, hearken to us, your,
suppliants, and deliver us from every trial and temptation, both
diabolic and human. Do not deprive us of your help, nor bring upon us
heavier chastisement than we are able to bear. For we are not capable of
conquering what opposes us, while you, Lord, have power to save us from
all adversities. Save us, O God, from the difficulties of this world in
accordance with your goodness, so that, having entered your holy altar
with a pure conscience, we may, without condemnation, offer you with the
heavenly Powers the blessed and thrice-holy hymn, and have accomplished
the divine ministry that is well-pleasing to you, we may be found worthy
of eternal life.

****

(aloud):

For holy are you, Lord our God, and you dwell and take your rest in the
holy place, and to you we offer glory and the thrice-holy hymn, to
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
****

People:

Amen.

Holy God, holy Strong, holy Immortal, have mercy on us.

Holy God, holy Strong, holy Immortal, have mercy on us.

Holy God, holy Strong, holy Immortal, have mercy on us.

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.

Both now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

Holy Immortal, have mercy on us.

****

Deacon:

Dynamis. ****

People:

Holy God, holy Strong, holy Immortal, have mercy on us. ****

After this the Priest give a blessing, saying:

Peace to all.

****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Wisdom. ****

The Reader declaims the Prokeimenon.

Deacon:

Wisdom. ****

The Reader reads the title of the Apostle.

Deacon:

Let us attend. ****

The Reader reads the Apostle.\
At the completion of the Apostle, the Priest says:

Peace to you.

****

Reader:

And to your spirit. Alleluia **(x3)**. ****

While the

Alleluia **is being sung, the Deacon takes the censer, receives the
Priest’s blessing, and comes out and censes the holy Gospel. The Priest
in a low voice says** ****

The Prayer of the Incense

To you, Lord our God, who are filled with all fragrance and joy, we
offer you this incense from the things that you have given us. Let it
then, we beg you, be taken up from our poor hands to your holy altar
above the heavens for an odour of sweetness and forgiveness of our sins
and those of all your people, by the grace and compassion and love for
humankind of your only-begotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together
with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

The Deacon says:

Let us all say, Lord, have mercy.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And after each petition.**

Almighty, heavenly Lord , the God of our fathers, we pray you, hear us.

For the peace of the whole world and union of all the holy churches, we
pray you, hear us.

For the salvation and assistance of our most holy father and Archbishop

**N.**, all the clergy and the Christ-loving people, we pray you, hear
us. ****

\[

For our sovereign Lady, Queen Elisabeth, the Royal family, her
government and all in authority, we pray you, hear us.**\]**

For this city, for every city, town and village, we pray you, hear us.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger, constraint,
captivity, bitter death, and our iniquities, we pray you, hear us.

For the people here present and who await your great and rich mercy, we
implore you, have compassion and mercy.

O God, save your people and bless your inheritance. Visit you world with
mercy and pity. Exalt the horn of Christians by the power of the
precious and life-giving Cross, at the intercession of our all-pure and
blessed Lady, Mother of God, of the Forerunner, your Apostles and all
your Saints, we implore you, most merciful Lord, hear us as we pray, and
have mercy.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **(x3).** ****

Prayer before the holy Gospel

****

Priest (in a low voice):

Master, Lover of humankind, make the pure light of your divine knowledge
shine in our hearts and open the eyes of our mind to understand the
message of your Gospel. Implant in us the fear of your blessed
commandments, so that, having trampled down all carnal desires, we may
change to a spiritual way of life, thinking and doing all things that
are pleasing to you. ****

(Aloud):

For you are the glad tidings, enlightenment, Saviour and guardian of our
souls and bodies, O God, and to you we give glory, together with your
only-begotten Son, and your all-holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon:

Stand upright. Let us listen to the holy Gospel. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

The reading is from the holy Gospel according to **N.**

People:

Glory to you, Lord. Glory to you. ****

Priest:

Let us attend. ****

And the deacon reads the appointed section of the holy Gospel. When the
Gospel is finished, the Priest says:

Peace to you.

****

People:

Glory to you, Lord. Glory to you. ****

Then the Preacher expounds the word of God.

Then the Deacon, standing in front of the holy Door, facing the People,
says:

Let us be devoutly attentive.\
In peace let us pray to the Lord.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And after each petition.**

For the peace of the whole world and the union of all the holy churches,
let us pray to the Lord.

For the salvation and assistance of our most holy Archbishop

**N.**, of all the clergy and the Christ-loving people, let us pray to
the Lord.

For forgiveness of our sins and pardon of our offences, and for our
deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint, assault
of enemies, let us pray to the Lord.

That the day that we pass through may be perfect, holy, peaceful and
sinless, let us all ask of the Lord.

****

People:

Grant this, O Lord. **And after each petition.**

An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a guardian of our souls and bodies,
let us ask of the Lord.

Pardon and forgiveness of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.

Things good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let
us ask of the Lord.

That we may live out the rest of our days in peace and good health, let
us ask of the Lord.

A Christian end to our life, painless, unashamed and peaceful, and a
good defence before the fearsome and dread judgement seat of Christ, let
us ask.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most glorious and blessed Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, of the holy, glorious, Prophet, Forerunner
and Baptist, John, of the godlike and all-praised Apostles, glorious
Prophets and triumphant Martyrs with all the Holy and Just, let us
entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Prayer after the holy Gospel

****

Priest (in a low voice):

You have made your divine and saving words resound for us, O God,
enlighten the souls of us sinners to understand the things that have
been read, so that we may be seen to be not only hearers of the
spiritual songs, but also doers of good deeds, maintaining a faith
without pretence, a life without blame, conduct without reproach,

****

(Aloud):

In Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom you are blessed and glorified,
together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest, bowing, says

(in a low voice):

Good Master, giver of life and bestower of good things, who give mortals
the blessed hope of eternal life, our Lord Jesus Christ, count us worthy
also to accomplish this ministry in holiness, for the enjoyment of the
blessedness to come. ****

(Aloud):

That being always guarded by your might, and guided to the light of
truth, we may give glory and thanksgiving to you, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon:

Let us chant in the peace of Christ. ****

Deacon:

Let none of the catechumens; none of the uninitiated; none of those who
cannot pray with us. Recognize one another. The doors! Let all stand
upright. ****

The Singers begin the hymn

Let all mortal flesh keep silent**, slowly and melodically.**

Let all mortal flesh keep silent, and with fear and trembling stand.
Ponder nothing earthly-minded, Let all mortal flesh keep silent, and
with fear and trembling stand. Ponder nothing earthly-minded, for the
King of kings and Lord of lords advances to be slain and given as food
to the faithful. Before him go the choirs of Angels, with every rule and
authority, the many-eyed Cherubim and the six-winged Seraphim, veiling
their sight and crying out the hymn: Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

****

After the holy Gifts have been placed on the holy Altar and before they
are covered with the Cloud, the Priest says

****

The Prayer of the Prothesis

God, our God, who sent forth the heavenly Bread, the food of the whole
world, our Lord and God Jesus Christ, as our Saviour, Redeemer and
Benefactor, to bless and sanctify us; bless this Offering, and receive
it on your altar above the heavens. In your goodness and love for
humankind be mindful of those who have offered it, and those for whom
they have offered it, and grant all their requests that are for their
salvation; and as we celebrate your divine mysteries keep us without
condemnation. For sanctified and glorified is your all-honoured and
majestic name, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

He censes the holy Gifts, saying:

Master almighty, King of glory, the God who knows all things before they
come to be, be present with us as we call upon you at this holy time,
and redeem us from the shame of transgressions. Cleanse our mind and our
thoughts from foul desires, worldly deception and every operation of the
devil, and accept from the hand of us sinners this incense for an odour
of sweet fragrance, as you accepted the offering of Abel and NoÃ«, Aaron
and Samuel and all your holy ones, delivering us from every evil deed,
and keeping us safe to be always well pleasing to you, and to worship
and glorify you, our Father, and your only-begotten Son and your
all-holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Deacon:

In God’s wisdom, let us attend. ****

The Priest covers the holy Gifts with the Cloud and begins the Creed,
saying the first words

I believe in one God. ****

People:

I believe in one God, Father almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and of
all things visible and invisible.

And in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten
from the Father before all ages, Light from Light, true God from true
God, begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father, through him all
things were made. For our sake and for our salvation he came down from
heaven, and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit and the Virgin Mary and
became man. He was crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate, and
suffered and was buried; he rose again on the third day, in accordance
with the Scriptures, and ascended into heaven and is seated at the right
hand of the Father. He is coming again in glory to judge the living and
the dead, and his kingdom will have no end.

And in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the Giver of life, who proceeds from
the Father, who together with Father and Son is worshipped and together
glorified; who spoke through the Prophets. In one Holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church. I confess one Baptism for the forgiveness of sins. I
await the resurrection of the dead and the life of the age to come.
Amen.

****

Prayer of the Kiss

****

Priest, in a low voice:

God and Master of all, lover of humankind, make us, unworthy though we
are, worthy of this hour, so that, cleansed of all deceit and hypocrisy,
we may be united to one another by the bond of peace and love, confirmed
by the sanctification of your divine knowledge through your
only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom you are blessed,
together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. ****

Deacon:

Let us stand with awe. In peace let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest (aloud):

For you are a God of peace, mercy, love, compassion and love for
humankind, with your only-begotten Son and your all-holy Spirit, now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us greet one another with a holy kiss. ****

After the Kiss has been given, the Deacon says:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest bows and says in a low voice:

O only Lord and merciful God, who dwell in the highest and look upon
lowly things, send forth your good grace upon those who have bowed their
necks before your holy altar, and seek the spiritual gifts that come
from you, and bless us all with every spiritual that cannot be taken
away.

****

(aloud):

For your name, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, is to be
praised, worshipped and supremely glorified, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon, to the Priest:

Sir, give the blessing. ****

The Priest prays for those present, saying:

The Lord will bless us all, serve with us and make us worthy of taking
our stand at his holy altar and of the coming of his holy Spirit, now
and always, and to the ages of ages.

****

The Priest signs the holy Gifts and says in a low voice:

Glory to God in the highest and peace on earth, goodwill.

**(x3)**

Lord, you will open my lips and my mouth will proclaim your praise.

**(x3)**

Let my mouth be filled with your praise, that I may sing your glory, all
day long your majesty.

**(x3)**

Of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages. Amen.

****

And bowing to left and right, he says aloud and melodiously:

Magnify the Lord with me, and let us praise his name together.

****

And they chant in reply:

The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will
overshadow you.

****

Priest:

May the Lord remember you in the kingdom of heaven, always, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

Deacon:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And after every petition.**

Save us, have mercy one us, have pity on us and keep us, O God, by your
grace.

For the peace from on high, God’s love for humankind, and the salvation
of our souls, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world and the union of all the holy churches,
let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy monastery

**(**this holy house**)**, and for the Catholic and Apostolic Church,
from the ends of the earth and to its furthest bounds, let us pray to
the Lord.

For the safety and salvation and assistance of our most holy Father and
Archbishop

**N.**, all the clergy and Christ-loving people, let us pray to the
Lord. ****

\[

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.**\]**

For this city, for every city, town and village, and for those who dwell
in them with Orthodox faith and reverence for God, for their peace and
security, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who bring offerings, those who care for the beauty of the holy
churches of God, and who remember the poor, the widows and orphans,
foreigners, strangers and those in need, and those who have asked us to
remember them in our prayers, let us pray to the Lord.

For those in old age and incapacity, the sick, the suffering, those
troubled by unclean spirits, and for their speedy healing from God and
for their safety and salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who pass their lives in virginity, purity and asceticism, and
in holy wedlock, and for our venerable fathers, mothers and brethren who
struggle on mountains, in caves, and in the hollows of the earth, let us
pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for Christians who are far
from home, for those our brethren in captivity and exile, in prisons and
bitter slavery, and for the peaceful return of each one to their own
home with joy, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who are present here and who pray with us at this holy time
and at every moment, fathers, mothers and brethren, for their zeal, toil
and readiness, let us pray to the Lord.

And for every Christian soul that is afflicted and distressed, and in
need of God’s mercy and help; for the return of those who have been led
astray, the health of the sick, the liberation of prisoners, and the
repose of our fathers, mothers and brethren who have gone to their rest
before us, let us pray to the Lord.

For the forgiveness of our sins and the pardon of our offences, for our
deliverance from all affliction, wrath, anger and constraint, and from
the assault of nations, let us pray to the Lord.

More intensely, for favourable weather, peaceful rains, good dews,
abundant harvests, fair seasons, and for the crowning of the year, let
us pray to the Lord.

For our prayer to be heard and to be acceptable before God, and that he
send down to us his rich mercies and acts of compassion, and for us all
to be found worthy of his kingdom, let us fervently pray.

Commemorating our all holy, pure, most glorious and blessed Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, of the holy and blessed John, the glorious
Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist, of the holy Apostles, of Stephen the
Archdeacon and Protomartyr, of Moses, Aaron , Elias, Elissaios, Samuel,
David, Daniel, the Prophets and of the Holy and Just, that by their
prayers and intercessions we may all find mercy.

And for the precious and heavenly, ineffable, immaculate, glorious,
fearsome, divine gifts, here set forth, and for the salvation of our
honoured father and Priest, who presides and offers them, let us entreat
the Lord our God.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **(x3)**

The Priest bows and, in a low voice, says

****

The Prayer of Offering of St James

Master and Lord, who visit us in mercy and compassion and have granted
us, humble sinners and your unworthy servants the grace to stand at your
holy Altar and to offer to you this dread sacrifice without shedding of
blood for our own sins and those committed in ignorance by the people,
look on me, your unprofitable servant and wipe away my transgressions
through your compassion and purify my lips and my heart from every
defilement of flesh and spirit, and banish from me every base and
unseemly thought, and enable me for this ministry by the power of your
all-holy Spirit, and accept me through your goodness as I approach your
holy altar, and be well pleased, Lord, for these gifts to be acceptable
that are offered through our hands, being gracious to my weaknesses, and
do not cast me away from your presence. Do not despise my unworthiness,
but have mercy on me, O God, in accordance with your great mercy and
according to the abundance of your compassion disregard my offences, so
that, coming into the presence of your glory with condemnation, I may be
found worthy of the protection of your only-begotten Son and the
illumination of your all-holy Spirit, but as your servant may I find
grace, mercy and forgiveness of sins both in this present age and in the
age to come. Yes, Master almighty and all-powerful, listen to my
supplication and grant me reprieve from my evil deeds, for it is you who
work all in all, and in all things we seek from you your help and
assistance and that of your only-begotten Son and your good, life-giving
and consubstantial Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
Amen.

****

And he adds a second

****

Prayer of Saint Denys the Areopagite

O God, who through your great and ineffable love for humankind sent out
your only-begotten Son into the world that he might turn back the sheep
that had gone astray, do not turn us sinners away as we undertake for
you this dread sacrifice without shedding of blood, for we do not trust
in our own righteousness but in your loving mercy, through which you
acquire our race. And now too we implore and beseech your goodness that
this mystery, which is performed through us for salvation, may not
become a cause of condemnation for your people, but be for the wiping
away of sins, renewal of souls and bodies, and for your good pleasure,
God and Father, for you are a God who loves humankind and to you belongs
glory, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of
ages. Amen.

****

The Prayer of the Veil

We thank you, Lord our God, that you have given us the freedom of entry
into the holy place by the blood of Jesus, inaugurating for us a new and
living way through the veil of his flesh. Having therefore been counted
worthy to enter the place where your glory dwells, and to be within the
veil, and to look upon the Holy of Holies, we fall down before your
goodness, Master. Have mercy on us, for we are filled with fear and
trembling as we are about to stand at your holy altar and to offer to
you this dread sacrifice without shedding of blood for our sins and
those committed in ignorance by the people. Send forth your good grace
upon us, O God, and sanctify our souls and bodies and spirits, and
change our thoughts towards true religion, that with a pure conscience
we may offer you mercy, peace, a sacrifice of praise. And having
uncovered the veils of the mysteries that symbolically surround this
sacred rite, show us clearly, and fill our spiritual vision with your
boundless light; and having cleansed our poverty from all defilement of
flesh and spirit, make it worthy of this dread and fearful presence.

****

(Aloud):

By the mercy and compassion and love for humankind of your only-begotten
Son, with whom you are blessed, together with all holy, good and
life-giving Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

And unveiling the coverings of the mysteries which in symbol surround
this sacred rite, show them to us clearly and fill the eyes of our minds
with your incomprehensible light, and purifying our poverty from every
defilement of flesh and spirit, make it worthy of this dread and fearful
presence, because you are a God of surpassing compassion and mercy, and
to you we give glory and thanksgiving, Father, Son and holy Spirit, now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us stand with awe. Let us stand devoutly. Let us stand with fear of
God and with compunction. Let us attend, that we may offer the holy
oblation to God in peace. ****

People:

Mercy, peace, a sacrifice of praise. ****

Priest:

The love of God the Father, the grace of our Lord and God and Saviour
Jesus Christ, and the communion and gift of the Holy Spirit, be with you
all. ****

People:

And with your spirit. ****

Priest:

Let our mind and hearts be on high. ****

People:

We have them with the Lord. ****

Priest:

Let us give thanks to the Lord. ****

People:

It is right and fitting. ****

Priest, bowing, says in a low voice:

Truly it is right and fitting, proper and necessary, to praise you, to
hymn you, to bless you, to worship you, to glorify you, to give thanks
to you, Fashioner of every creature, visible and invisible, the Treasury
of the eternal good things, the Source of life and immortality, the God
and Master of all, whose praise is sung by the heavens and the heavens
of heavens and all their powers, the sun and the moon and the whole
choir of stars, earth, sea and all that they contain; the heavenly
Jerusalem, festival of the chosen, church of the first-born, who are
inscribed in heaven; spirits of the Just and of Prophets, souls of
Martyrs and Apostles; Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, Authorities and dread Powers, the many-eyed Cherubim and
the six-winged Seraphim, that with two wings cover their faces, with two
their feet and with two they fly, as they cry out to one another with
unceasing voices and with never silent hymns of glory,

****

(aloud):

with radiant voices singing the triumphant hymn of your majestic glory,
shouting, glorifying, crying aloud and saying. ****

People:

Holy, holy, holy, Lord, Sabaoth. Heaven and earth are full of your
glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he who came and who comes in
the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest. ****

Priest (standing and signing the holy things) says in a low voice:

Holy are you, King of the ages, Lord and giver of all holiness. Holy too
is your only-begotten Son, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, through
whom you made all things. Holy too is your all-holy Spirit, who searches
all things, and your depths, God and Father.

****

Bowing he continues:

Holy are you, all-powerful, fearsome, good, tender-hearted,
compassionate to what you fashioned. You made humankind from earth,
according to your image and likeness, granting it the enjoyment of
Paradise. But when it transgressed your commandment and fell away, you
do not forsake or abandon it, O Good One, but chastened it as a
compassionate Father, called it through the Law, tutored it through the
Prophets.

Finally you sent your only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, forth
into the world, to come and renew and raise up your image. He came down
from heaven and was incarnate from the Holy Spirit and Mary the holy
Ever-Virgin and Mother of God, lived among mortals and disposed all
things for the salvation of our race.

When he, the one without sin, was about to accept for us sinners his
voluntary and life-giving death through a cross, on the night he was
given up, or rather gave himself up, for the life and salvation of the
world,

****

The Priest, taking the bread, signs it and says in a low voice:

taking bread in his holy, immaculate and unblemished and immortal hands,
looking up heaven and showing it to you, his God and Father, giving
thanks, blessing, sanctifying and breaking it, he shared it among his
holy and blessed Disciples and Apostles, saying:

****

He replaces the bread, saying aloud:

Take, eat. This is my body which is broken and distributed for you for
the forgiveness of sins.

****

People:

Amen. ****

He takes the cup, signs it and says, in a low voice:

Likewise after supper, taking the cup and mixing wine and water, gazing
up to heaven and showing it to you, his God and Father, giving thanks,
blessing, sanctifying, filling it with the Holy Spirit, he shared it
among his holy and blessed Disciples and Apostles, saying:

****

He puts down the cup and says aloud:

Drink from this all of you. This is my blood of the new covenant, which
is poured out and distributed for you and for many for the forgiveness
of sins.

****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest, in a low voice:

Do this in memory of me. For as often as you eat this bread and drink
this cup, you proclaim the death of the Son of Man, and confess his
resurrection, until he comes. ****

Deacon:

We believe and confess. ****

People:

Your death, Lord, we proclaim, and your resurrection we confess. ****

The Priest signs the Gifts, bows and says:

Therefore, we sinners too, remembering his life-giving sufferings and
the saving Cross, his death and burial, and resurrection from the dead
on the third day, his ascension into heaven and sitting at your right
hand, his God and Father, and his second, glorious and fearsome coming,
when he comes in glory to judge the living and the dead, when he will
render to each according to their works — Spare us, O Lord!

**(x3)** —, or rather according to his compassion, offer to you, Master,
this dread sacrifice without shedding of blood, asking that you do not
act towards us according to our sins, but that, according to your
kindness and ineffable love for humankind, setting aside and wiping out
the record of the debt against us your suppliants, you would grant us
your heavenly and eternal gifts, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor has it entered the human heart the things that you have prepared, O
God, for those who love you. And do not reject your people because of me
and because of my sins, O Lord who love humankind. ****

(aloud):

Your people and your Church entreat you. **(x3)**

People:

Have mercy on us, Lord God, the Father, the Almighty. **(x3)**

The Priest, in a low voice:

Have mercy on us, Lord God, the Father, the Almighty. Have mercy on us,
God our Saviour. Have mercy on us, O God, in accordance with your great
mercy, and send forth upon these holy gifts, here set forth, your
all-holy Spirit, **(bowing)** the Lord and giver of life, enthroned with
you, God and Father, and your only-begotten Son, co-reigning,
consubstantial and co-eternal, who spoke by the Law and the Prophets and
by your New Covenant, who came down in the form of a dove upon our Lord
Jesus Christ in the river Jordan, and rested upon him, who came down
upon your holy Apostles in the form of fiery tongues in the upper room
of holy and glorious Sion on the day of Pentecost. **(Standing up)**
Your same all-holy Spirit, Lord, send down on us and on these gifts here
set forth, ****

(aloud):

that having come by his holy, good and glorious presence, he may
sanctify this bread and make it the holy body of Christ, ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

and this Cup the precious blood of Christ, ****

People:

Amen. ****

The Priest signs the holy Gifts and says in a low voice:

that they may become for all those who partake of them for forgiveness
of sins and everlasting life. For sanctification of souls and bodies.
For a fruitful harvest of good works. For the strengthening of your
holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, which you founded on the rock of
the faith, so that the gates of Hell might not prevail against it,
delivering it from every heresy and from the scandals caused by those
who work iniquity, and from the enemies who arise and attack it, until
the consummation of the age. ****

The clergy alone answer:

Amen. ****

Then the Priest signs the Gifts, bows and says:

We make this offering to you, Master, for your holy places also, which
you glorified by the divine Epiphany of your Christ, and by the
visitation of your all-holy Spirit, especially for the holy and glorious
Sion, the mother of all the Churches; and for your holy, Catholic and
Apostolic Church throughout the whole inhabited world. Richly bestow on
it now too, Master, the gifts of your all-holy Spirit.

****

People (quietly, many times, as the Priest prays):

Remember, Lord our God.

Remember, Lord, also our holy fathers and bishops in your Church, who
throughout the inhabited world rightly proclaim the word of truth.

Especially our holy father, our most holy Archbishop

**N.**, all his clergy and priesthood, grant him an honoured old age,
preserve him for many years, as he shepherds your people in all true
religion and reverence.

Remember, Lord, the honourable order of presbyters here and everywhere,
the diaconate in Christ, all the rest of the ministers, every order in
the Church and our brotherhood in Christ and the whole Christ-loving
people.

****

\[

Remember, Lord, the priests present with us at this holy time before
your holy altar for the offering of the holy sacrifice without shedding
of blood, and give to them and us a word by the opening of our mouth to
the glory and praise of your all-holy name.**\]**

Remember, Lord, also according to the multitude of your mercy and acts
of compassion, me, your lowly, sinful and unworthy servant, and visit me
with mercy and compassion. Deliver and free me from those who persecute
me, Lord, Lord of Powers. And though sin has multiplied in me, your
grace will abound even more.

Remember, Lord, the deacons who stand round your holy altar and them a
life without reproach, preserve their diaconate unstained and grant them
good standing.

Remember, Lord, the holy city of you our God, the queen of cities, every
city, town and village, and those who with Orthodox faith and devotion
dwell in them, and their peace and security.

****

\[

Remember, Lord, our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family,
her government and all in authority, and all her household. Set in order
her counsels, that we may live a quiet life in all piety and
reverence.**\]**

Remember, Lord, those who travel by land, sea and air, Christians who
live far from home, those in bondage and prisons, those in captivity and
exile, those in mines and in tortures and bitter slavery, our fathers,
mothers and brethren, and a peaceful return for each of them to their
own homes.

Remember, Lord, those in old age and incapacity, the sick, the
suffering, those troubled by unclean spirits, and for their speedy
healing from God and for their safety and salvation.

Remember, Lord, every Christian soul that is afflicted and distressed,
and in need of God’s mercy and help, and the return of those who have
been led astray.

Remember, Lord, those who pass their lives in virginity, purity and
asceticism, and in holy wedlock, and for our venerable fathers, mothers
and brethren who struggle on mountains, in caves, and in the hollows of
the earth, and Orthodox communities in every place and for our community
in Christ in this place.

Remember, Lord, our father, mothers and brethren who labour and serve
for the sake of your holy Name.

Remember, Lord, all for their good. Have mercy on all, Master. Be
reconciled with us all. Give peace to the multitudes of your people.
Disperse scandals; put an end to wars; ends the schisms of the churches;
speedily dissolve the uprisings of heresies; throw down the pride of the
nations; exalt the horn of Christians; grant us your peace and your
love, O God, our Saviour, the hope of all the ends of the earth.

Remember, Lord, seasonable weather, gentle showers, fair dews, abundant
harvests, perfect seasons and the crowning of the year with your
goodness. For the eyes of all hope on you, and you give them their food
in due season; you open your hand and fill every living being with your
good pleasure.

Remember, Lord, those who have brought and those who bring offerings in
the holy Churches of God, those who remember the poor, and those who
have asked us to remember them in our prayers.

Also be pleased to remember, Lord, those too who have brought offerings
today for your holy altar, and those for whom each has brought them, or
whom each one has in mind, and those whose names are now read to you.

****

And he commemorates those whom he wishes of the living.

Remember, Lord, our parents, friends, relatives and brethren

**NN**.

All these Orthodox remember, Lord, those we have remembered and those we
have not. Give them heavenly things in return for things earthly,
incorruptible for corruptible, everlasting for temporary, in accordance
with the promise of your Christ, for you have the authority of life and
death.

Also be pleased to remember, Lord, those who have been well-pleasing to
you from the beginning of time, generation by generation, holy Fathers,
Mothers, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Teachers,
Ascetics, and every righteous spirit, made perfect in faith.

Hail, full of grace, the Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women,
and blessed is the fruit of your womb, for you gave birth to the Saviour
of our souls.

Especially our all-holy and blessed, immaculate Lady, Mother of God and
Ever-Virgin Mary,

****

People:

Remember, Lord, our God.

The holy, glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist John, the holy
Apostles and Evangelists, the holy Prophets, Patriarchs and Righteous
ones, the holy Martyrs and Confessors and all the Saints, not because we
are worthy to commemorate their blessedness, but that they too, as they
stand before your dread and terrible judgement seat, may in return
remember our wretchedness.

****

And he remembers those departed Christians whom he wishes and continues.

Remember all these, O Lord, the God of spirits and all flesh, those
Orthodox, we have remembered and those we have not. Give them rest in
the land of the living, in your kingdom, in the delight of Paradise, in
the bosom of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, our holy Fathers, whence pain,
grief and sighing have fled away, where the light of your face watches
and shines out for ever. And make the ending of our lives Christian,
well-pleasing, sinless and in peace, Lord, gathering us under the feet
of your chosen ones, when you wish and as you wish, only with shame and
transgressions, through your only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and
Saviour Jesus Christ, for he is only one without sin who has appeared
upon earth.

****

Deacon:

And for the peace and stability of the whole world and of the holy
Churches of God, and those for whom each has made offerings or whom they
have in mind and for the people here present, and for all people. ****

Priest (aloud):

Through whom for us and for them, for you Master are a good God and a
Master who loves humankind: ****

People:

Remit, forgive, pardon, O God, our transgressions, voluntary and
involuntary, in knowledge and in ignorance. ****

Priest (aloud):

By the grace, compassion and love for humankind of your Christ, with
whom you are blessed and glorified with your all-holy, good and
life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Again and again and at all times, in peace let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

For the precious, heavenly, glorious, divine gifts here set forth and
sanctified, to the Lord our God let us pray.

That the Lord our God, having accepted them on his holy and spiritual
Altar above the heavens, as a savour of spiritual fragrance, may send
down upon us in return his divine grace and the gift of the all-holy
Holy Spirit, let us pray.

Having asked for the unity of the faith and the communion of the
all-holy Spirit, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole
life to Christ, our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest, bowing, says in a low voice:

O God and Father of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, the Lord
whose name is exalted, the blessed nature, the unstinted goodness, the
God and Master of all things, the One who Exists, blessed to the ages of
ages, enthroned upon the Cherubim, glorified by the Seraphim, before
whom stand thousands and thousands, and tens of thousands of armies
Angels and Archangels, accept as sweet fragrance the gifts, offerings
and fruits here presented to you, by the grace of your Christ and the
visitation of your all-holy Spirit. Sanctify also, Master, our souls and
bodies and spirits. Touch our minds and search out our consciences. Cast
out from us every evil thought, every impure idea, every base desire and
memory, every unseemly word, all envy, pride and hypocrisy, every lie,
every deceit, every worldly temptation, all greed, all vainglory, all
wickedness, all wrath, all anger, all malice, all blasphemy, and all
sloth, every movement of flesh and spirit that is alien to the will of
your holiness.

****

(aloud):

And count us worthy, Master, Lord who love humankind, with boldness and
without condemnation, with a pure heart, enlightened soul, face
unashamed, lips that are sanctified to dare to call upon you, the holy
God in heaven, as Father, and to say: ****

People:

Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come, your
will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors; and do not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest, in a low voice:

And do not lead us into temptation that we cannot endure, Lord, Lord of
powers, who know our weakness, but deliver us from the evil one and from
his works, and from all his influence and guile, for the sake of your
holy Name, that has been invoked upon our lowliness. ****

(aloud):

For yours is the Kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest (bows, and in a low voice):

We, your servants, Lord, have bowed our necks to you before your holy
altar, awaiting rich mercies from you. Send forth to us now, Master,
your rich grace and blessing, and sanctify our souls and bodies and
spirits, that we may become worthy communicants and partakers of your
holy mysteries for forgiveness and everlasting life. ****

(aloud):

For you, our God, are to be worshipped and glorified, with your
only-begotten Son and your all-holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest (aloud):

And the grace and mercies of the holy, consubstantial, uncreated,
indivisible and adored Trinity shall be with us all. ****

People:

And with your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us attend. ****

The Priest signs and raises the Bread, saying in a low voice:

Holy Lord, who rest in the holy place, make us holy by the word of your
grace and the coming of your all-holy Spirit. For you said, Master , ‘Be
holy, because I, the Lord your God, am holy’.

God beyond understanding, Word, consubstantial with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, co-eternal and inseparable, accept from me, a sinner, with
the Cherubim and Seraphim, this pure hymn among your holy sacrifices
without shedding of blood, as I cry out and say:

****

(aloud):

The Holy Things for the holy. ****

People:

One is holy, one is Lord: Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father,
with the Holy Spirit, to whom be glory to the ages of ages. ****

Then the Priest breaks the bread and holds one half in his right hand
and one in his left. He dips that in his right in the chalice, saying:

Union of the all-holy Body and precious Blood of our Lord and God and
Saviour Jesus Christ.

****

And he signs the part in his left hand and will change, holding the two
parts. He signs the other part. Then joining the two parts and dipping
the other two of the extremities in the chalice and signing the
remaining breads, he says at each dipping the word of union and at once
begins to divide and first of all he places one part in each single
chalice, saying:

It has been united and sanctified and perfected, in the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

****

Then he makes double parts for each of the clergy and dips them in the
chalice. After the completion of the

Glory**, the Deacon says:**

In the peace of the Lord let us sing.

****

Communion:

Taste and see that the Lord is good. Alleluia. ****

Deacon:

Sir, bless. ****

Priest:

God is blessed, who blesses and sanctifies you that divide in the fear
of God, and all who are about to communicate in faith. ****

And the clergy reply:

Amen. ****

And when he is about to communicate:

Master, Christ our God, the heavenly Bread, the food of the whole world,
I have sinned against heaven and before you, and I am not worthy to
partake of your holy and immaculate mysteries. But through goodness and
ineffable longsuffering, make me worthy, without condemnation and shame,
to partake of your all-holy Body and your precious Blood for forgiveness
of sins and everlasting life.

****

Then he communicates and distributes to the clergy, and when the Deacon
raises the chalice he says:

Sir, bless.

****

Priest:

Glory to God, who has sanctified and sanctifies us all. ****

Priest and Deacon:

Be exalted to the heavens, O God, and your glory into all the earth, and
your kingdom abides to the ages of ages. ****

Priest:

Blessed is the name of the Lord our God to the ages of ages. ****

Deacon:

With fear of God and faith, draw near. ****

And signing the faithful, the Priest says, as he gives communion:

The holy Body of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus Christ is
distributed to the faithful for forgiveness and everlasting life.

****

Communion is traditionally given under the two kinds separately. As he
gives the consecrated Bread, the Priest says:

The Body of Christ. ****

The communicant answers:

Amen. ****

For the Cup the Priest says:

The Blood of Christ. The Cup of salvation. ****

The communicant answers:

Amen. ****

People:

Fill my mouth with your praise, O Lord, fill my lips with joy, that I
may raise a hymn to your glory. ****

The Priest in a low voice says

****

The Prayer of Incense

****

and censes the Holy Things:

We thank you, Saviour, God of all things, for all the good things you
have granted us, and for the communion of your holy and immaculate
mysteries, and we offer you this incense, as we ask: Guard us under the
shelter of your wings, and count us worthy even until our last breath to
partake of your holy things, for the sanctification of our souls and
bodies, and for inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, for you, O God,
are our sanctification, and to you we give glory and thanksgiving, to
the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit.

****

Deacon:

We thank you, Christ our God, that you have counted us worthy to partake
of your Body and Blood for forgiveness of sins and everlasting life.
Keep, we entreat, without condemnation, as you are good and love
humankind. ****

Then the Priest says another

****

Prayer of the Incense

You have made us glad, O God, by union with you, and we offer you
incense of gratitude, fruit of our lips, as we confess your grace. Let
it ascend, O God, and not descend empty, but grant too the pure and
lasting myron of the sweet fragrance of your all-holy Spirit. Fill our
mouths with praise and our lips with gladness and our hearts with joy
and delight in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom you are blessed with
your all-holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of ages.

****

Deacon:

Again and again at all times, in peace let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy.

That the communion of his holy Gifts may become for us an averting of
every evil thing, provision for the journey of eternal life, for the
communion and gift of the Holy Spirit, let us pray.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most glorious and blessed Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints and Just, let us
entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest, in a low voice:

O God, who through great and ineffable compassion, have condescended to
the weakness of your servants, and counted us worthy to partake of this
heavenly table, do not condemn us sinners for communicating of your
immaculate mysteries, but preserve us, O Good One, in your
sanctification, so that, becoming worthy of your all-holy Spirit, we may
find a part and lot with all the Saints from the beginning, who have
been well-pleasing to you, in the light of your face, through the
compassion of your only-begotten Son, our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus
Christ, with whom you are blessed and glorified, with your all-holy,
good and life-giving Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.
****

(aloud):

For blessed and sanctified and glorified is your all-honoured and
majestic holy Name, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and
for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest, in a low voice:

O God great and wonderful, look upon your servants, for to you we have
bent our necks, and stretch out your mighty hand, that is filled with
blessings, and bless your people and preserve your inheritance, that we
may always at every moment glorify you, our only living and true God,
the holy and consubstantial Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

****

(aloud):

For to you belong and are due from us all, all glory, honour, worship
and thanksgiving, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon:

In the peace of Christ, let us go forth. ****

People:

In the name of the Lord. Sir, give the blessing. ****

Priest:

You have given us sanctification, Master, by the communion of the
all-holy Body and precious Blood of your only-begotten Son, our Lord and
God and Saviour Jesus Christ. Give us too the grace of your good Spirit
and keep us blameless in the faith and guide to perfect sonship and
redemption and the everlasting enjoyment to come, for you and your
only-begotten Son and your all-holy Spirit are our sanctification and
enlightenment, O God, now and for ever and to the ages.

Advancing from power to power, and having completed in your church the
whole divine ministry, we now ask you also, Lord our God, count us
worthy of your perfect love for humankind. Make straight our way, root
us in your fear, have mercy on us all, and declare us worthy of your
heavenly kingdom in Christ Jesus our Lord, with whom you are blessed and
glorified, with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and for
ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

Deacon:

May we be guarded in the peace of Christ. ****

Priest, aloud:

Blessed is God, who blesses and sanctifies, protects and gives peace,
and preserves the life of us all through the communion of his holy,
immaculate and life-giving mysteries, which we have been counted worthy
to receive, always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
