\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ Monday Matins \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers.md) \]

ON MONDAY MORNING

AT MATINS

****

After the Six Psalms we sing

** The Lord is God, ** **with its verses, and the Troparion of the Saint
of the day. But in the holy Lent, the** Alleluia ** **with its verses
and the Hymns to the Trinity in Tone 1.**

After the 1st reading from the Psalter we sing the following\
Kathismata of Compunction. Tone 1.

Conceived in iniquities, I the prodigal dare not raise my gaze to the
height of heaven, but confident in your love for humankind I cry: O God
be merciful to me and save me.

****

Verse

*:* Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your wrath.

If the just can scarcely be saved, how shall I the sinner appear? I have
not borne the burden and heat of the day. Number me with those of the
eleventh hour, O God, and save me.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Immaculate Mother of God, blessed in heaven and glorified on earth,
hail, Bride without bridegroom.

****

After the 2nd reading other Kathismata.\
The soldiers watching.

Hasten to open to me your fatherly embrace; prodigally I have squandered
my whole life, turning from your pity, O Saviour, to wealth which cannot
be spent; do not now despise my beggared heart; for to you, Lord, with
compunction I cry: I have sinned against you, save me!

****

Verse:

** Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your wrath.

The judgement seat is fearful and the judgement just; my deeds are
dreadful, but, O Merciful, speedily save me and rescue me from
punishment; deliver me, Master, from the portion of the goats, to stand
me on your right hand, Judge most just.

****

After the 3rd Reading, Other Kathismata.\
The soldiers watching.

Foolishly I have gone far from you, O Most Compassionate, and like the
Prodigal squandered my life, a slave each day to the irrational
passions. But at the prayers of the Angels, accept me, compassionate
Father, like the Prodigal child, and save me I implore.

****

Verse:

God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

The glorious Champions have encompassed you, Lord, with the glory of the
contest and the honour of crowns of victory. For by perseverance under
tortures they defeated the lawless, and by divine power from heaven they
achieved the victory. At their prayers, O Saviour, free me from the
invisible foe and save me.

Glory. Both now. **

**Theotokion.**

The soldiers watching.

As you surpass the immaterial Hosts, All-pure Maiden, and alone
transcend the Ranks of heaven, you receive from them fitting praise, O
All-pure. But with the Angels intercede with your Son that I, alone
condemned, may be delivered from the tyranny of the passions.

****

And after Psalm 50 we chant the following Canon of compunction, a
composition by Kyr Joseph, of which the acrostic is:

O Word, wash away the filth of my faults. Joseph.

****

Ode 1. Tone 1. Irmos.

Your triumphant right hand, in a manner fitting God, has been glorified
in strength, O Immortal; for in its infinite strength it broke in pieces
the enemy, and made a strange new way for the Israelites in the deep.

****

Troparia.

In accordance with the multitude of your mercy, O Christ, wash away, I
beg, the multitude of my sins, and grant me the thought of turning back,
that I may glorify your goodness beyond understanding.

O Word of God, you appeared on earth through your compassionate pity as
a man in a body. Therefore accept me, who have sinned above all men, as
I now fall down before you in repentance.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Revered Martyrs, imitating the slaughter of Christ, who willingly
suffered death, you endured sufferings of many kinds and death itself.
Therefore you have found immortal life.

Visibly carrying within you the fire of divine love, you did not quail
at fire, O Martyrs, but with the fervent free offerings of your pains,
you burned up all the firewood of the cult of many gods.

****

Theotokion.

Drawn up with us, ranks of Bodiless Powers sing your praise, Virgin
all-praised. For you bore in your womb the uncircumscribed in a body,
remaining Virgin, as before childbirth, O Bride of God.

****

Another Canon, of the Bodiless Powers, of which the acrostic is:

\
First hymn of Theophanes for the Angels. ****

Irmos. Your triumphant right hand.

As you stand in splendour by the MasterÂ’s throne, all-holy Angels,
implore the One who with his Father is without beginning and the Angel
of his great counsel to inspire my word as I sing your praise.

The divine Mind, first taking thought, established the ranks of the
Angels as mirrors that reflect the light whose source is God and all the
radiance of the lamp with triple sun, as far as in them lies.

****

Theotokion.

He, who as God set in fair order the regiments of the Powers on high,
dwelt in your womb that did not know wedlock, O Mother of God, and is
higher than the Seraphim, and without change he became flesh.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

You alone know the weakness of mortals and in compassion took its form;
gird me with power from on high, to cry to you: Holy the living temple
of your ineffable glory, O lover of mankind!

****

Troparia.

Come to your senses, my soul, and cry out to your Creator, who knows
your every secret, and show the fruits of repentance, that he, the
compassionate Lord, may have mercy on you and rescue you from
everlasting fire.

Be merciful, only loving Lord, be merciful and save me, as like the
Publican I cry out to you in fear, impeded by a swarm of faults, weighed
down by the weight of my falls and filled with measureless shame.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Filled with wisdom and true knowledge, the Martyrs showed the folly of
Greek wisdom, destroyed the skilled teacher of wickedness and, having
valiantly competed, fittingly received with joy the crowns of victory.

By confessing a Unity in nature, but a Trinity in persons, brave
Athletes, inspired by faith, you banished the error of the cult of many
gods and appeared like beacons, flooding with rays of grace the hearts
of all.

****

Theotokion.

Holy, pure Bride of God, in holiness you bore the Son and Word, who
rests among the Holy Ones, like the Father without beginning, and who
makes holy in the Holy Spirit those who devoutly call him holy.

****

[Of the Bodiless Powers. The same
Irmos.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

[The Seraphim, drawing near immediately to the deifying Light, and
wholly filled by it, are radiant with the primal brilliance that is
first bestowed, and as second lights by their position they are made
divine.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

[Aiming to hymn with zeal the AngelsÂ‘ radiance, let us believers, with
purity of mind and unpolluted mouths, through them ask for help from
God, and may we attain their
brilliance.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;
font-family:"Book Antiqua""}

****

[Theotokion]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;color:red;
font-style:normal"}

[Found worthy as is right to see the Mind beyond all being, Gabriel
brought to you, Virgin all-blameless, a message full of the joy, openly
declaring to you the WordÂ‘s conception, and proclaiming your ineffable
giving
birth.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt;font-family:"ClassGarmnd BT";
mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman";
mso-ansi-language:EN-GB;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA"}
****

Ode 4. Irmos.

Avvakoum with foreseeing eyes perceived you as a mountain overshadowed
by the grace of God, from which, he foretold, the Holy One of Israel
would come, for our salvation and refashioning.

****

Troparia.

To what shall I compare you, my wretched soul, who perform dreadful
deeds and do no good ones? Turn back, cry out to him who for your sake
willingly became poor: You who know the heart, take pity, save me.

You have appointed repentance, O Saviour, for those who turn back; grant
me it, Good One Master, before the end of my life, giving me compunction
and sighs, like the Harlot who once kissed your feet.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The Martyrs, filled with the streams of the Spirit, appeared by divine
decree as rivers of living water, and by the Spirit, O Christ, dried up
all the turbid torrents of error and watered the minds of the faithful.

Greatly did the godly Martyrs struggle; for they endured fire and sword
and every dread penalty. At their entreaties, Word of God, deliver from
the greatest and eternal punishment those who hymn you with faith.

****

Theotokion.

The Son, who of old was born of the Father who is unbegotten, had his
birth in time when he was born from you, O Virgin, for he wished as he
is compassionate to abolish the long-time war of those born of earth, he
who is beyond days and times.

****

Of The Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

The Thrones, who fill the first order, the Cherubim and Seraphim shine
unceasingly with the rays of the Godhead, while ranked with divine
Hierarchies, they now sing, Â‘Glory to your power, O Lord!Â’

The Seraphim sing the praise of the threefold unity of the Godhead with
thrice-holy hymns and never-silent voices, making clear the most pure
mystery of theology and teaching the orthodox Faith.

The Cherubim who devoutly receive the out-pouring of wisdom and the
breadth of knowledge of Wisdom itself, single and simple, imitating God
grant them to those next in rank, transmitting to them their radiance.

****

Theotokion.

The One who is perceived to be beyond all creation, truly accomplishing
dread wonders beyond understanding of the life-giving fashioning of
life, resplendent with bright glories of virginity, dwelt in your womb,
O Immaculate.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

O Christ, who enlightened the ends of the world by the brightness of
your coming, and made them radiant by your Cross, enlighten with the
light of your divine knowledge the hearts of those who hymn you with
right belief.

****

Troparia.

I have fallen under the corruption of the passions, and I quail at your
just tribunal, just Judge; and so I implore you, strengthen me to do
good deeds which justify me.

You know the hidden and secret things of my heart, my God and Fashioner
and Lord; do not condemn me at the hour of judgement, when you come to
judge the universe.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The Saints, as they entered the fire, showed the ardour of their
inspired love; therefore, bedewed with the expectation of things to
come, the God-bearing Martyrs rejoiced.

Spurred on by hope of good things, the Martyrs most courageously endured
the mangling of their limbs, and with the cords of their unyielding
endurance throttled the resourceful foe.

****

Theotokion.

A mouth skilled in speech will not be able to expound the ineffable
wonder of your child-bearing, Bride of God; for you bear him who is
beyond explanation, and carry in your arms him who grasps the universe
in his hand.

****

Of the Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

On fire with divine love, the Dominions, Authorities and Powers, those
of second rank, with never silent voices sing the praise of one divine
Essence and Power.

The ranks of Archangels, with the numberless regiments of Angels and
Principalities, are ranged in order by the Spirit, clearly instructed to
reverence one illuminating Essence in three Realities.

****

Theotokion.

You were made lovelier than all the glory of Angels, for you conceived
their Maker and Lord, immaculate Mother of God, and bore him ineffably
incarnate from your blood.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

The deepest abyss has surrounded us, there is none to deliver. We have
been counted as sheep for the slaughter. Save your people, O God, for
you are the strength and restoration of the weak.

****

Troparia.

As you a physician, O Christ, heal the passions of my heart, and wash me
clean of every stain, my Jesu, with streams of compunction, that I may
hymn and magnify your compassion.

I have gone astray in ways of destruction and fallen into miry pits of
offences; turn me back, O Christ, and bring me to the unerring paths of
your statutes, that I may glorify you.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The truly most precious stones, when buried under stones did not deny
the Rock of life, nor did they sacrifice to carved stones, the far-famed
and crown-bearing Martyrs of the Lord.

Cultivating their souls with the plough of faith, the Martyrs made the
ear of corm of the struggle flower a hundredfold, and were found worthy
of blessed delight.

****

Theotokion.

All-pure Virgin, as you bore the fire of the fiery ministers you
appeared all-blameless and first above all creation, blessed among
women, and graced by God.

****

Of the Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

The ranks of the Bodiless Powers, Lord, as they stand beside the throne
of your glory, honour you with unceasing angelic voices, for you, O
Christ, are their strength and their song.

The Angels who see your face are made resplendent with the inconceivable
beauty, the supreme glory of your divine splendour, for you are their
light and their joy.

****

Theotokion.

The Word, who as all powerful made the universe by his will, who brought
the armies of the Bodiless Powers into being from nothing, who before
was without flesh, was incarnate from you, O all-pure.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

We the faithful recognise you, O Mother of God, as a spiritual furnace;
for as he, the highly exalted, saved the three Children, so he wholly
refashioned me, humanity, in your womb, the God of our fathers. praised
and glorified above all.

****

Troparia.

Once Daniel, with virtue as his companion, muzzled lions; imitate him,
my soul, and by your return to God make the one who always roars like a
lion and seeks to seize you ever without effect.

By excess of prodigal dissolution, Lord, I have dreadfully befouled my
soul; as you have exceeding goodness, then, O Christ, receive me as the
Prodigal, and have pity on me, who sing: God of our Fathers, praised and
highly glorious.

****

Of the Martyrs.

Firmly strengthened by the law of Christ, the unconquerable Martyrs
bravely eradicated the counsels of the lawless, dying like professionals
as they sang: God of our Fathers, praised and highly glorious.

Divinely shining Martyrs of the Lord, visibly aflame with the light of
the Trinity, you passed through the darkness of punishments and the fog
of error as you sang: God of our Fathers, praised and highly glorious.

****

Theotokion.

The laws of nature are made new in you, O all-blameless, for outside the
laws of the flesh you bear Christ, the lawgiver who ordains by law
redemption for all who sing: God of our Fathers, praised and highly
glorious.

****

Of the Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

You, Master, are Light without beginning, shining out from Light, the
Father. you set in array lights, the armies of the Angels, mirrors that
reflect your lightning flash that never sets, God of our Fathers,
praised and highly glorious.

You, the Lord of all things, clearly save the race of mortals by angelic
powers, for you have set them over all who believe and who with right
belief sing your praise, God of our Fathers, praised and highly
glorious.

Tongue and mind have no strength to tell out the glory of your wonders
and your works, Master, for you decked with glory the whole order of the
heavenly Powers, God of our Fathers, praised and highly glorious.

****

Theotokion.

The Son, who before was without mother from the Father and became
without father as one of us for our sake, became incarnate from you,
holy Maiden. Him the regiments of Bodiless Powers now worship, God of
our Fathers, praised and highly glorious.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

In the furnace, as in a smelter, the Israelite Youths shone with the
beauty of godliness brighter than gold as they said: All you his works
bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

Compassionate Christ, my Redeemer, from the fog of sins and temptations
of many kinds, which now holds me fast, redeem me, as I cry: All you his
works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

When you are about to come in glory, O Christ, to judge the world,
number me too with the company of your elect, as I cry out and say: All
you his works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the
ages.

****

Of the Martyrs.

You have entered on a holy land, wise Martyrs; for having struggled
greatly on earth, you have received heavenly life, as you sing: All you
his works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

Having put off the corruptible body, as Martyrs you have put on the
garment of incorruption, as from on high you cry to Christ: All you his
works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Theotokion.

Sacred voices from long ago foretold that you would be the Mother of the
God who framed all things, O Immaculate, to him we sing: All you his
works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Of the Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

As we believers imitate the armies of Angels, shining and resplendent
with the rays of the beauty of the triple Sun, let us sing: All you his
works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

The supreme Godhead, as source of all good things, brings into being
second lights, which receive the primal Light and cry out: All you his
works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

The primal Mind and Creator, in a manner beyond being, gave existence to
Angel minds that are beyond the world, that clearly draw near it and cry
out: All you his works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to
all the ages.

****

Theotokion.

All-blameless Virgin, for us you brought to birth, ineffably incarnate,
the One who before the ages was born from the Father beyond reason, to
whom we cry out: All you his works bless the Lord, praise and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

The burning bush, that was not consumed, was a type of your
child-bearing; quench for us now the raging furnace of temptations we
pray, O Mother of God, that we may unceasingly magnify you.

****

Troparia.

Like the Woman of Canaan I cry to you: Have mercy on me, O Word, for I
have a soul which is endangered by demonic assaults, and foolishly does
unlawful things, and has no perception of your divine fear, O
Long-suffering.

Fix the foundations of my soul on the rock of your commands, Lord, and
trip up the serpent who shamelessly wishes to trip me up, and deliver me
from his villainy, as you are good and full of mercy.

****

Of the Martyrs.

You have already passed through the insubstantial \[irresistible\] water
of temptations and the tempest of harsh torments, and you have clearly
reached the haven of the Kingdom above and enjoy divine calm.

You became luminous, O Martyrs, and have been found worthy of the light
that knows no evening. You exult in the Church of the first-born and
rejoice with the choirs of Angels; with them implore the Giver of life
on our behalf.

****

Theotokion.

You carry him who carries all things and give suck to him who nourishes
all things; great and fearful is your mystery beyond understanding, Ark
of august sanctification, Virgin Mother of God; therefore with faith we
call you blessed.

****

Of the Bodiless Powers. Same Irmos.

As initiates of your ineffable glory, O Saviour, you gave existence to
the bodiless Minds. Now through them guard your people who have recourse
to you in faith and love, that without ceasing we may ever magnify you,
the Master.

As you are the origin of peace and love, Almighty Lord, you appoint an
Angel of peace to protect your flock, to guard the rational faith and to
destroy all heresies by your power.

Plant in your Churches, Master, praised as all sweetness, the sweet
radiance of the things of heaven, and give them a well-ordered estate,
that without ceasing we may magnify you, the Saviour.

****

Theotokion.

Now serried bands of Angels, O all-pure, with never silent voices honour
your Offspring. Those who contemplate them as they stand in ordered
ranks are filled with their joys and without ceasing magnify you, the
Mother of God.

****

Exapostilarion. Women hear.

Archangels and Angels, Principalities and Dominions, Powers and
Authorities and Thrones, many-eyed Cherubim and now also six-winged
Seraphim, intercede for us to be rescued from dangers and from the
unquenchable fire.

****

Theotokion. Same melody.

You are my defender, O All-pure, and my strong rampart, and defence of
the world, and as I fall before you, I cry: O Virgin, rescue me from
pains, and snatch me from the eternal fire, for I have put my trust in
you.

****

Aposticha of Lauds. Of Compunction.

Another world awaits you, my soul, and a Judge who is to publish all
your hidden and dread deeds. So do not stay with things here, but in
anticipation cry out to the Judge: O God, be merciful to me and save me!

**Verse 1. We have been filled in the morning with your mercy, Lord, we
have rejoiced and been glad. In all our days, let us be glad, for all
the days when you have afflicted us, for the years when we have suffered
adversity. Look upon your servants and your works, and guide their
children.**

Do not reject me, held fast by sloth, my Saviour. Rouse my thought to
repentance and show me to be a tried worker of your vineyard, granting
the payment of the eleventh hour and your great mercy.

**Verse 2. And may the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us.
Prosper the work of our hands, O prosper the work of our hands.**

****

Of the Martyrs.

Come, all you peoples, and let us honour with hymns and spirituals songs
ChristÂ’s Champions, the beacons of the world and heralds of the Faith,
the ever-flowing source from which healings spring up for the faithful.
At their intercessions, Christ our God, grant peace to your world and to
our souls your great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Joy of the heavenly hosts.

More holy than all the holy Powers, more honourable than all creation,
Mother of God, Sovereign Lady of the world, who bore the Saviour, as you
are good, save us from ten thousand faults and dangers by your prayers.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
