\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone2.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat2ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Matins](sun2mc.md) \]
\[ Monday Matins \] \[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers1.md) \]

# ON MONDAY MORNING

## AT MATINS

****

After the 1st reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of Compunction.

Tone 2

Like waves of the sea my iniquities assail me; like a skiff on the ocean
I am alone and storm-tossed by many offences. But guide me, Lord, to a
fair haven through repentance and save me.

Verse: Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your
wrath.

I am a fruitless tree, Lord, and of compunction I bear no fruit at all;
and I wait to be cut down with fear, and I quail before the unsleeping
fire; and so I implore you, before that constraint, turn me back and
save me.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

As you are source of compassion, grant us pity, Mother of God. Look on a
people who have sinned, and show your power as always; for hoping in you
we cry: Hail, as once Gabriel did, the chief Captain of the Bodiless
Powers.

After the 2nd Reading, Kathismata of Compunction.

Have mercy on me, said David, and I too cry to you: I have sinned, O
Saviour, wipe away my sins through repentance and have mercy on me.

Verse:* *Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your
wrath.

Have mercy on me, have mercy on me, lamented David for two sins; for ten
thousand offences I cry to you: He watered his couch with tears, while I
have not found one drop; I despair and entreat, have mercy on me, O God,
according to your great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

We magnify you, Mother of God, as we cry: Hail, closed gate, through
which the Paradise of old has been opened for mankind.

After the 3rd Reading, Kathismata.  
As you are source of compassion.

All-holy Bodiless Choirs, entreat the good God and Master to spare us at
the hour of judgement, to deliver us from the bitter punishment, the
wickedness of demons, the blackness of the passions and from every
threat, as we take refuge with love in your protection.

Verse: God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

Of the Martyrs.

The Saints, having you, who robe the heaven with clouds, as their robe,
endured the torments of the lawless, and destroyed the error of idols;
at their entreaties free us from the invisible foe, O Saviour, and save
us.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

What mother was ever heard to be a virgin? What virgin was ever known to
be a mother? All that concerns you, Mother of God, is wondrous. And so
with faith we magnify you.

Canon of compunction, of which the acrostic[\[1\]](#_ftn1) is  
Give me showers of tears, O Word of God. Joseph.

Ode 1. Tone 2. Irmos.

“Come, you peoples, let us sing a song to Christ God, who parted the sea
and guided the people that he had brought up from the slavery of the
Egyptians, for he has been glorified.”

Troparia.

O Word made flesh, who came, as you said, not to call the just, but
sinners to repentance, accept me, who have sinned greatly, and save me.

I alone have been enslaved to sin; I alone have opened a door to the
passions. O you, who alone long to be reconciled, turn me back and save
me in your compassion.

Of the Martyrs.

The Champions, Lord, stand before your judgement seat wearing crowns of
victory, having conquered the insolent threats of the boaster and gained
the wealth of immortality.

As they pour out for us a stream of healings, the champion Martyrs, dry
up, by the power of the divine Spirit, the passions that flood from our
flesh.

Theotokion.

O Maiden, alone graced by God, you bore the source of dispassion, heal
me, wounded by passions, and snatch me from eternal fire.

Another, of the Bodiless Powers, of which the acrostic is:  
I sing the praise of the choir of Angels.

Troparia.

You revealed the bodiless Choirs, O Christ, to be God-bearing coals, set
aflame by the splendour of your Essence, and who glorify you as
all-powerful.

Having obtained and been granted the power of incorruption and the glory
of immortality, O Christ, the Angels are enlightened by their nearness
to you.

The Angels, O Christ, appeared as lamp-bearers, revealing the immaterial
purity that is theirs by nature, imaging it perceptibly through symbols.

Theotokion.

The ranks of Angels, honoured Virgin, serve with rejoicing your
birth-giving that is above nature; for you gave birth to their God and
Lord.

Ode 3. Irmos.

“Establish us in you, O Lord, who put sin to death by a Tree, and plant
you fear in the hearts of us who sing your praise.”

Troparia

Having come down into a womb without corruption, O Christ, make new by
repentance my soul, corrupted by the passions, and show it to be filled
with everlasting light.

I have obeyed the bitterest of foes and accomplished every sin, and I
have unsparingly embittered you, the only long-suffering, O Lover of
mankind.

Of the Martyrs

Walled about with the Cross, the invincible warriors and Martyrs of the
Saviour, bravely cast down like walls the ramparts of error.

Bracing your weakness by divine power, noble Champions, you handed over
to utter destruction the adversary’s strength.

Theotokion

Mary, censer of gold, drive away the foul stench of my passions, and
establish me, who am shaken by the assaults of the cunning adversary.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos.

“The bow of the powerful was smashed by your might, O Christ, and the
weak girded themselves with you, their power.”[\[2\]](#_ftn2)

Troparia

God, who is by nature immortal, as wise creator, reveals armies that are
immortal by grace.

You Angels, who now stand before Christ the summit of desires, intercede
that we may all be saved.

Theotokion

The creator of all times, Ever-Virgin Mother, took from you, it is
believed, a beginning in time.

Ode 4. Irmos

“I sing your praise, for I heard your report, Lord, and I was amazed,
for you came as far as me, seeking one who had gone astray. And so, O
Most Merciful, I glorify you for your great condescension towards me.”

Troparia

I have fallen into the mire of sin and lost the loveliness from on high,
Lord, and I fear the punishment. Therefore make my wretched soul bright
with the beauty of repentance.

With cunning speech the cunning one stole me away from you, O God of all
things, and made me his own fodder. Snatch me from his wickedness and
call me back by ways of repentance.

The time of life has become for me a labour of destruction. In one
instant, O Christ, save me, as once by your command you saved the
repentant Harlot, that I may sing your praise, O only Sinless One.

Of the Martyrs

The lawless one, being willingly the inventor of wickedness, tried to
compel Christ’s Martyrs to offer worship to lifeless gods, but he was
worsted, for they knew only God the creator.

Reverencing a Unity in Essence and a Trinity in persons, uncreated
Godhead, you gave no reverence at all to creatures, Martyrs of Christ;
and therefore you endured all manner of punishments.

Theotokion

Willingly the Lord takes flesh, O Immaculate, from your pure blood, is
united to humankind and, swayed by your entreaties, receives the
repentant, who before were subject to sins.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos.  
I heard of your glorious dispensation.

I bring you the Bodiless Powers as suppliants. Accept them, O Merciful
One, as you are compassionate and ransom me from sin.

The godlike minds, being neighbours to the Mind, the cause of all, are
cleansed and enlightened by the highest thoughts.

The divine orders of the heavenly host, set in order by the divine
Spirit, are preserved unharmed.

Theotokion

Contemplating you, O Virgin, from afar carrying in your arms God made
flesh, Isaias made his proclamation.

Ode 5. Irmos

“O Lord, the giver of light and maker of the ages, guide us by the light
of commands, for we know no other but you.”

Troparia

You who gave sight to the blind, enlighten my blinded soul, giving it
strength for good deeds and to hate altogether the sleep of
indifference.

Only Saviour, who of old healed the wounds of the one who fell among
thieves, heal my soul, wounded by the truly dread bite of sin.

Of the Martyrs

The company of honoured Athletes shamed the company of lawless
persecutors, undergoing torments of many kinds, and now they ever
rejoice with the companies of holy Angels.

The radiant Martyrs were revealed as brightly shining stars, sending out
rays of endurance and enlightening the souls of the faithful by the
divine Spirit.

Theotokion

You gave birth, O All-blameless, as a new-born babe to the Son who
exists before the ages, who is double with two operations of the will,
as man and at the same time God.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos.  
The coal foreseen by Isaias.

The Seraphim and Cherubim with the Thrones lifted up on high, blazing
with the divine radiance of the Godhead, imitating God give light to
those that follow.

O Word of God, giver of all light outpoured, you have brought in mirrors
formed of light that receive your brightness with gladness and
unswerving intensity.

Theotokion

The holy Archangel Gabriel came down from heaven, revered Bride of God,
and brought you good tidings, joy that abolished the gloom of the
Forefathers.

Ode 6. Irmos.

“Surrounded by an abyss of faults, I call upon the unfathomable abyss of
your compassion: O God, bring me up from corruption.”

Troparia

I was thrown down by the wickedness of the serpent and I lie on a bed of
despair. Raise me up, O Christ, who set the paralytic upright with a
word.

Buffeted by the blasts of the dragon’s breath and tossed about from
every side by the waves of sin, save me as you saved Peter, O Lord,
Lover of mankind.

Of the Martyrs

Surpassing the bounds of nature, you endured torments beyond nature, and
so, Martyrs, you were found worthy of good things beyond understanding.

As fair, as beautiful, as precious you have been united to the One who
makes fair, the One who is beautiful, revered Martyrs, you intercede at
all times on our behalf.

Theotokion

From all generations the Maker chose you, the beauty of Jacob whom he
loved, O All-blameless, and having dawned from you he appeared.

Another Irmos

\[“Having listened to the sound of the words of my supplication, Master,
from the anguish of my soul, rescue me from disasters; for you alone are
the cause of our salvation.”\][\[3\]](#_ftn3)

Troparia

The godlike imprints of your glory, source of light, O Master Christ,
formed as rays of light with beams of shining light, abide for ever.

Strengthened with divine strength, the Seraphim cry aloud with never
silent voices the thrice-holy hymn. They reveal to us how to honour the
nature in three persons.

Theotokion

As of old the Lord swore in truth to David, he has fulfilled, by coming
froth from your womb. For you have given birth, O Maiden, to him who
reigns over the earth.

Ode 7. Irmos.

“When the golden image was being worshipped on the plain of Deira, your
three Youths trampled down the godless decree; cast into the midst of
fire, refreshed with dew they sang: Blessed are you, the God of our
fathers.”

Troparia

Through the twistings of my mind and the assaults of demons I have
become far from your arms, like the Prodigal, filled with every shame.
But now I turn back and cry out, like him: I have sinned. Do not
despise, Jesu, who were made flesh for my sake.

O God of all, you saved the Nivevites of old under a threat that gave
birth to death when they repented. In the same way, only Lover of
mankind, deliver from dread punishment my heart, befouled by excess of
sin, that now turns back.

Of the Martyrs

The malefactor who planned to wound you was grievously wounded, godlike
Martyrs, blessed by God, and he remains unhealed; but your wounds have
appeared as healing for all believers, who have been wounded by the
assaults of the one who tripped us up of old.

You were not terrified by savage wild beasts, threats of tyrants,
cutting swords, or instruments like saws; but you endured all as in a
body not your own, Great Martyrs, and so you won your crowns.

Theotokion

Your womb, immaculate Maiden, Bride of God, became a dwelling for the
immaterial light, that lessens our godlessness with rays of the
knowledge of God, whose praise we sing as we cry: Blessed are you, the
God of our fathers.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos.  
Youths were revealed.

As they ever dance around the throne of the ineffable glory, the
heavenly Minds sing with bodiless voices: Our most high God and God of
our fathers, blessed are you.

When the ranks of Angels saw you being carried up to heaven with your
flesh, they lifted up the heavenly gates for you, as they sang: Our most
high God and God of our fathers, blessed are you.

Theotokion

Gabriel revealing you, O Maiden, to be the summit of the Law and the
Prophets, cried out: See, you alone All-praised and blessed are giving
birth to our most high God and God of our fathers.

Ode 8. Irmos

“The God who came down into the furnace for the Hebrew Youths and
changed the flame to dew, you his works, praise as Lord and highly exalt
him to all the ages.”

Troparia

Falling to the evil one, I have been enslaved by his wiles, and the
deceiver boasts as he sees me in such loss. Snatch me from him, O
Compassionate, the turning round of the deceived.

Loose me who am held fast by bonds of the passions of the body that
cannot be unloosed, Christ Saviour of the world, who the bonds of those
from every age, and guide me to run to the paths of salvation.

Of the Martyrs

The creators of the passions have truly devised every wickedness against
me. Blessed Martyrs, as imitators of the passion of Christ, rescue me
from their harm.

Like the Youths of old you did bow the knee to graven images and were
cast into the furnace of torments and appearing in a dew from God, you
remained unburned, O Martyrs, as you sang the praise of Christ to the
ages.

Theotokion

My wretched soul, Virgin Mother of God, has been weakened by many
assaults of the evil one. By your strong prayers make it whole, that I
may glorify you to the ages.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos.

You established the Angels as images of your goodness, O Word, who
fulfil your commands with strength and work with all who cry out with
faith: Let all creation that has being praise the Lord and highly exalt
him to all the ages.

You adorned the commonwealth of heaven with fruitful virtues, making it
radiant with the hierarchies of Angels, accept, O Christ, this
commonwealth which cries: Let all creation that has being praise the
Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages.

Radiantly rejoicing, let us sing unceasingly the inspired song of the
Bodiless Powers, and as we sing to our God and Master let us cry out
with them this song: Let all creation that has being praise the Lord and
highly exalt him to all the ages.

Theotokion

Uprightness itself, which wisely directs the universe, fittingly loved
you, the all-unblemished and immaculate Mother of God, having beyond
explanation made his dwelling in you, O All-pure. This we glorify: Let
all creation that has being praise the Lord and highly exalt him to all
the ages.

Ode 9. Irmos

“The Word from God, who came with ineffable wisdom to renew Adam, who by
eating had fallen dreadfully to corruption, incarnate inexpressibly for
our sake from a holy Virgin, we the faithful with one mind magnify in
hymns.”

Troparia

See, it is time for working. Why are you foolishly asleep, my soul, in
total indolence? Rouse yourself, make your lamp bright with tears.
Hurry, the Bridegroom of our souls is at hand. Do not be sluggish and do
not stay outside God’s door.

How fearful is your judgement seat that makes clear every action, laying
it bare to Angels and mortals\! How dread the sentence that you will
pass on offences\! Deliver me from it, O Christ, granting me before the
end tears of turning back.

Of the Martyrs

Signed with the love of the Lamb and the blood of the Shepherd, the
glorious and godlike Athletes were sacrificed rejoicing, like innocent
lambs, and in heaven they truly make bright all the holy Church of the
first born.

Revealed as beacons with rays like the sun, by the light of your contest
you make radiant every soul, you dispel all the fog of error, noble
Athletes, therefore, as is fitting, with faith you are called blessed.

Theotokion

Spare me, Lord, spare me, when you come to judge me, and do not condemn
me to the fire, do not chastise me in your wrath. The Virgin who bore, O
Christ, the multitudes of Angels and the company of the Martyrs implore
you.

Of the Bodiless Powers. Another Irmos

\[“You are all desire, you are all sweetness, O Word of God, Son of the
Virgin, God of gods, Lord, Holiest of the Holy. And so, with her who
gave you birth, we all magnify you.”\][\[4\]](#_ftn4)

Clothed in snow white robes the shining Angels appeared, symbolically
making clear to the godly Disciples your second Coming, O Christ. With
them, as we contemplate your godhead, we all magnify you.

You create, as Benefactor, every rational nature, as a second radiance
of your primal splendour. And so as we sing your praise we all magnify
you.

Theotokion

When he perceived and was amazed by the brightness of your virginity,
the godlike Chief Captain cried out to you his ‘Hail\!’. And so we all
magnify you as Mother of God.

Aposticha of Lauds, of Compunction.

When I think on the foulness of my fearful deeds, I take refuge in your
pity, imitating the Publican, the weeping Harlot and the Prodigal son;
and so I fall before you, O Merciful, before you condemn me, O God,
spare me and save me.

Overlook my iniquities, Lord, who were born of a Virgin, and purify my
heart, making me a temple of the Holy Spirit; do not reject me from your
presence, you whose mercy is without measure.

Of the Martyrs.

O Martyrs and Champions, you suffered for Christ unto death, you have
your souls in heaven in the hand of God, and your relics are escorted
through all the world. Priests and Kings venerate them; and all we
peoples declare as we make our customary cry: A precious sleep before
the Lord, is the death of his Holy Ones.

Glory. Both now. ** Theotokion.

Like a fruitful olive, the Virgin blossomed with you, the fruit of life,
to bear for the world as fruit your great and rich mercy.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1)Excluding the Theotokia of Odes 1-7.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2)Although this is the Irmos, it is sung as part of the
Ode, since without it the acrostic would be defective.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3)This Irmos does not form part of the acrostic, though
the Ode is one troparion short.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4)This Irmos does not form part of the acrostic, but the
Ode is one troparion short.

 

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

