\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](general.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Prophet](prophet.md) \]
\[ [Office for an Apostle](apostle.md) \]
\[ [Office for Two or More Apostles](apostles.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Martyr](martyr.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Woman Martyr](wmart.md) \]
\[ [Office for Two or More Martyrs](martyrs.md) \]
\[ [Office for Two or More Women martyrs](wmarts.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Hieromartyr](hieromartyr.md) \]
\[ [Office for a Bishop](bishop.md) \] \[ Office for an Ascetic \]
\[ [Office for a Woman Ascetic](wascetic.md) \]

# AT VESPERS

**Prosomia. Tone 4. You have given as a sign.**

Bridling every pleasure, you denied the body, O wise in God. By deeds of
self-mastery and harshness and endurance of trials you embittered your
senses. In exchange for all these you receive unending delight,
perpetual pleasure and unspeakable joy.

Through self-mastery and brief supplication you made the passions of the
body wither, and you suffocated the crafty serpent with showers of
tears, blessed and inspired Father, and you were exceedingly
well-pleasing to God. Therefore Jesus, the lover of mankind and Saviour
of our souls, adorned you with heavenly gifts of grace.

You finished the course of your ascetic life without swerving and you
kept the faith, therefore you were adorned with a crown of justice,
which Christ, who apportions prizes as is right and gives awards, had
prepared for you, and the reward of your toils. Beseech him to furnish
us now also with these, god-bearing Father.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

All-blameless, who bore the Sun of justice, dispel the fog of the
passions that afflict me, and chase far from my miserable heart the
serpent who cheats my soul, and enchants me now with sensual pleasures
and vanities, and guard your servant with the calm of dispassion.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

When she saw Christ, the lover of mankind, crucified and pierced in the
side by a lance, the All-pure wept and cried out, ‘What is this, my Son?
Why does an ungrateful people revenge it self on you for all the good
things you did for them? And why do you hasten to leave me childless? I
am amazed, O Compassionate, at your voluntary crucifixion’.

# AT MATINS

**The Canon.  
Ode 1. Tone 8. Irmos. Let us sing to the Lord.**

\[Let us sing to the Lord, who led his people in the Red Sea, for he
alone has been greatly glorified.\]

****

Troparia.

The love of the Master drew you, and abandoning the body’s pleasures,
blessed father, you found your rest in Christ.

You were raised to the heights, blessed Father, and you passed through
the middle wall of uncreated being, and your delight is pure.

Receiving in your heart an immaterial ray, you were enlightened and you
dispelled all the fog of the passions.

****

Theotokion.

Adam’s race, lifted up to the blessedness that is beyond the mind
through you, Mother of God, worthily glorifies you.

****

Ode 3. Irmos. You are the foundation.

\[You are the foundation, Lord, of those who have recourse to you; you
are the light of those in darkness; and my spirit hymns you.\]

****

Troparia.

The fire of the godhead you enfolded, venerable, god-bearing Father, and
purified you were declared to be a burning coal on earth.

You put on the death of the passions before the end, venerable father,
and through death you departed to an unending life.

By strong reasoning you subdued the flesh, venerable Father, and showed
your soul to be unhumbled to the slavery of the passions.

****

Theotokion.

By your intercessions, O all-blameless, give us help, driving off the
assaults of dread dangers.

****

Irmos.

You are the foundation, Lord, of those who have recourse to you; you are
the light of those in darkness; and my spirit hymns you.

****

Kathisma. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.

Devoutly longing for the poverty of Jesus you abandoned perishable
wealth and this transient life, wise Father, and taking your cross on
your shoulders you travelled to the end the narrow path with joy,
treading on the pleasures of the body, holy one, through the mastery of
every wicked passion, and you reached the wide, divine plain of
Paradise. our venerable Father.

****

Theotokion.

With compunction of my soul, I bend the knee to you, good Virgin, and
with supplication I cry out: Attend to me and see my misery, bowed down
by sins. Having maltreated my soul and body, I expect those fearful
punishments. Help me then, O Virgin, and rescue me from them, O Mother
of God, for you have the power.

****

Or Cross-Theotokion.

The Virgin and Ewe-lamb, seeing on a cross the Lamb who had been born
from her for our sake made away with and pierced by a lance, wounded by
the arrows of grief cried out with lamentation: What is this new
mystery? How can you, the Lord of our life, be dying? Therefore arise,
and raise with yourself our fallen forefather.

****

Ode 4. Irmos. I heard your report, Lord.

\[I heard your report, Lord, and was afraid. I understood your works and
glorified your might.\]

****

Troparia.

Your servant, Lord, thrust aside much-divided care, making his
untroubled mind your dwelling.

Your delight, blessed Saint, was in the commands of the Gospel; for
taking up your cross you followed the Master rejoicing.

On wings of humility you shattered the snares of the ill-intentioned;
therefore, Venerable Father, you were exalted and declared a citizen of
heaven.

****

Theotokion.

Grant us pardon of offences, as you are sinless; make your world
peaceful, O God, at the prayers of her who gave you birth.

****

Ode 5. Irmos. Rising at dawn.

\[Rising at dawn, Lord, we cry out to you, ‘Save us\! For you are our
God, we know no other but you’.\]

****

Troparia.

Alone you turned to flight the rage of the serpent, God-bearing Father;
while you turned all your desire towards your Master.

Prudently you governed your body’s senses, and were declared a monument
of the virtues, All-blest Father.

Revered Saint, you bore the heat of the day and were found worthy of the
joy of the Lord.

****

Theotokion.

Mary, Mother of God, without bridegroom, bring to naught the hopes of
our foes, and make those who praise you glad.

****

Ode 6. Irmos. Grant me a tunic.

\[Grant me a tunic of light, O Most Merciful, Christ our God, who wrap
yourself in light as in a garment.\]

****

Troparia.

The approach of the serpent did not beguile your servant, O Christ, nor
did the fire of temptations affright him.

Your way of life on earth, Venerable Father, was equal to that of
angels; you were adorned by the right hand of the Almighty.

You obtained self-mastery, uninterrupted prayer, untroubled love, and so
you appeared as an unsullied mirror of God.

****

Theotokion.

The Word of God revealed you to mortals as a heavenly ladder, for
through you he came down to us.

****

Irmos.

Grant me a tunic of light, O Most Merciful, Christ our God, who wrap
yourself in light as in a garment.

****

Ode 7. Irmos. The Youths from Judea.

\[The Three Youths from Judea, who attained to the faith of the Holy
Trinity in Babylon of old, they sang out as they trampled down the
furnace’s raging flames, ‘Blessed are you, O God, the God of our
Fathers\!’\]

****

Troparia.

For putting pleasures to death and bridling anger, O all-blest, you have
received the prize of the inheritance above; and you cry with joy: God
of our Fathers, blessed are you.

You passed unswervingly through the finest path of virtues, revered
Father, and drove on towards the city of the undefiled Eden, as you sang
with joy: God of our Fathers, blessed are you.

Devoutly you proclaimed the glory of the Trinity, O all-blessed, and
find rest to take your delight in the three-sunned light, and you cry
with gladness: God of our Fathers, blessed are you.

****

Theotokion.

You were the all-blest rod from the root of Jesse, O Virgin, whose
blossom was a saving fruit for those who cry out with faith to your Son:
God of our Fathers, blessed are you.

****

Ode 8. Irmos. The King of heaven.

\[The King of heaven, whose praise the Angels are singing, all you hosts
of the Bodiless Powers, praise him and exalt him most highly to all
ages.\]

****

Troparia.

The One who wonderfully strengthened the Saint for ascetic struggles,
praise and highly exalt to all the ages.

You shared the Angels’ way of life on earth, all-blest, and now you
dwell with them in heaven to the ages.

The band of monks rejoices, and the company of saints and just dances,
for you have fittingly received a garland of victory.

****

Theotokion.

Beyond nature you gave birth, O Virgin, to the Creator and Saviour, God
the Word; therefore we praise you to all the ages.

****

Irmos.

The King of heaven, whose praise the Angels are singing, all you hosts
of the Bodiless Powers, praise him and exalt him most highly to all
ages.

****

Ode 9. Irmos. We who through you.

\[We, who through you, O Virgin, have been saved, confess you to be most
truly the one who gave birth to God. With all the choirs of the heavens
you we now magnify.\]

****

Troparia.

Your memory, Venerable Father, fittingly gladdens all the throngs on
earth to-day; save us who honour it year by year.

Intercede that those who celebrate with faith your memory, worthy of
praise, venerable Father, may be delivered from the stumbling blocks of
the enemy.

As his servant, blessed, venerable Father, you ever stand before the
throne of the Master; do not cease to intercede for your flock.

****

Theotokion.

We sing your praise with psalms, O Full of grace, and never silent we
cry to you: Hail\! For you became a source of gladness for all.

****

Irmos.

We, who through you, O Virgin, have been saved, confess you to be most
truly the one who gave birth to God. With all the choirs of the heavens
you we now magnify.

****

At the Liturgy, for the Apostle and Gospel, see January 17th.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

