\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ [6 September](6_september.md) \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ [15 September](15_september.md) \] \[ 16 September \]
\[ [23 September](23sept.md) \] \[ [24 September](24sept.md) \]
\[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

## 

ON THE 16TH OF THE MONTH

Commemoration of the Holy and All-praised Great Martyr Efphemia.

****

AT VESPERS

At

** Lord, I have cried, **we insert 6 stichera, and sing 3 prosomia of
the feast.**

Tone 2. Ὅτε ἐκ τοῦ ξύλου σε νέκρον.

The wicked tasting of the tree of old in Eden turned out dreadfully for
the ancestors of the race, introducing death for the whole race of
mortals; but now we have been restored to an unsullied life and a better
lot through the divine Cross; as we lift it up we sing the praise of the
Lord who was lifted up upon it, lifting the world up with himself.

You raised the erring sheep on your shoulders, O Saviour, and brought it
to your Father through your precious and life-bearing Cross, and you
numbered it with the Angels by the divine Spirit; for you replaced the
tree with a tree, O Christ; as we now lift it up with faith we glorify
you, who were lifted on it and lifted us.

Let us believers stand in the house of God, adorning ourselves with
inspired deeds, and let us behold the place of a Skull with most pure
minds; and let us mortals with Angels look on the all-holy tree being
lifted up, on which Christ God opening wide his hands drew and caught us
all and lifted us up to heaven.

****

And 3 of the Saint. Tone 4. Ὡς γενναῖον.

With your soul shining brightly with the beauties of virginity and with
the blood of martyrdom, you were drawn near to the Creator, who truly
keeps you incorrupt forever and round whom you dance with hosts of
Archangels and Angels, with choirs of Apostles, Prophets and Martyrs, O
all-praised.

Acquainted with the wheels, wrestling with wild beasts, and with fire
and water, steeled in your thought by the divine Spirit, bravely you
drowned the ruler of darkness in the streams of your blood, and ran
heavenwards to the spiritual bridal chambers, bringing your contest, O
Virgin, as gift to your bridegroom.

In dying, O Martyr, you poured out the everliving shedding of your blood
for praise of the Lord, watering the faithful and enlightening them with
knowledge, while drowning in it the unbelieving foes; therefore a divine
volume is entrusted to you, and you strengthen eternally the doctrines
of the Church.

Glory*.*

**Tone 6. By Anatolios.**

Adorned with the virtues, enlightened in thought, pouring into the
hearts of the faithful sweet fragrance of myrrh, dawning from the east
like a shining star and making an assembly of the godly Fathers through
the visitation of the Holy Spirit, do not cease to intercede for us to
the Lord, all-glorious Efphemia, that our souls may be saved.

Both now. **

**Same Tone.**

The four-cornered world is sanctified today as your four branched Cross
is lifted up, Christ our God; and with the horn of our faithful
Sovereigns is lifted, as by it they crush horns of the hostile. Great
are you, O Lord, and wonderful in your works\! Glory to you.

****

At the Aposticha. Tone 6.

Your endured blows and crucifixion and shame, long-suffering Lord,
wishing to redeem all from the hand of the deceiver, O only giver of
life, all-compassionate and lover of mankind.

****

Verse:

** Exalt the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool, for he is
holy.

I honour your Cross, loving Saviour, the nails and the lance, through
which you have redeemed all from corruption as alone giver of life and
benefactor of all, only lover of mankind and our Saviour.

****

Verse:

God is our king; he has wrought salvation in the midst of the earth.

Nailed to a cross for me, my Saviour and Redeemer, supremely good, you
were struck and reviled, given vinegar to drink and pierced by a lance;
and you bear them all, O only sinless One.

Glory*.*

**Tone 8. By Vyzantios.**

Let every tongue be stirred to the praise of all-glorious Efphemia,
every race and every age, young men and virgins, let us crown with
praises the Virgin Martyr of Christ; for like a professional she fought
and, casting off her woman’s frailty, through athlete’s toils she cast
down the tyrannous foe; while adorned with heavenly and divine strength
she asks her bridegroom and God to bestow on us his great mercy.

Both now.

**Same Tone.**

Your precious Cross, Christ God, which Moses prefigured in himself of
old, when he cast down and routed Amalek; and David the singer cried out
to you and ordered your footstool to be worshipped: to-day we sinners
with unworthy lips worshipping you, who deigned be fixed upon it, and
praising you we beg with the Thief: Lord, make us worthy of your
kingdom\!

****

Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 4.

O Jesu, your lamb cries aloud: O my Bridegroom, I long for you; and
seeking you I struggle, and I am crucified and buried with you in your
baptism; and I suffer for your sake, that I may reign with you; and I
die for You, that I may live in you; but as a spotless victim now accept
one who with longing is slain for you. Through her prayers, as you are
merciful, save our souls\!

****

Of the Feast.

Lord, save your people, and bless your inheritance; granting to faithful
Christians victories over their enemies; and protecting your
commonwealth by your Cross.

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma of the Saint.  
Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross. Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ.

Loving your bridegroom, Christ, you radiantly adorned your lamp and
shone out with virtues, O all-praised; therefore you entered with him
into the marriage, having received from him the crown of your contest;
but from dangers rescue us who celebrate with faith your memory.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Of the Feast.**

Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, to the new commonwealth that
bears your name grant your mercies, Christ God; make your faithful
people glad by your power, granting them victories over their enemies;
may they have your help in battle: a weapon of peace, an invincible
trophy.

****

After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter, Kathisma of the Saint.  
Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross. Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ.

Your struggles, pure Saint, and your crown your sweat and your wonders
put to shame the trophies of the devil; for longing from your heart for
your bridegroom Christ, you did not quail before scourges or death; but
you were offered wholly to God, wearing the crown of true religion.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Of the Feast.**

In Paradise I fell terribly by the bitter counsel of the slayer of
mortals; on Calvary you raised me up again, O Christ, healing the curse
of the tree by a tree, slaying the serpent who put me death by
deception, and you bestowed on me divine life. Glory to your divine
crucifixion, O Lord.

\[

**In the church of the Saint we sing the following at the 50th Psalm.  
Tone 4. Jesus having risen.Ἀναστὰς ὀ Ἰησοῦς.**

Give me strength, Efphemia all-praised, to praise you, honoured maiden,
as you intercede with Christ to have mercy on me.\]

****

The Canons of the Feast and of the Saint, of which the acrostic, without
the Theotokia, is:

Τhe all-praised maiden now I celebrate.

**  
By Monk John.**

Ode 1. Tone 8. ᾊσωμεν τῷ Κυρίῳ.

The all-praised maiden draws the companies of heavenly powers and the
choirs of mortals to hymns of praise by her wonders.

Honoured Efphemia, despising race and the fame that comes from wealth,
gained Christ in place of all.

The Master, desiring the loveliness of your most fair heart, made you
worthy of the heavenly bridal chambers.

****

Theotokion.

Immaculate Mother of God, who bore beyond nature the eternal and divine
Word, we sing your praise.

****

Ode 3. Σὺ εἶ τὸ στερέωμα.

You appeared at the judgement seat with manly soul, and by heroic
struggles you routed the foe, all-praised Martyr.

There was no blemish to your beauty, no wrinkle in your soul; and Christ
admitted you into immaculate bridal chambers.

All-praised martyr of Christ, heal the bruises of my soul, by your
prayers shatter the sophistries of the foe.

****

Theotokion.

We Christians have all gained you as our refuge and protection, and we
glorify you unceasingly, O Bride of God.

****

The Irmos.

“You are the support, O Lord, of those who have recourse to you; you are
the light of those in darkness, and my spirit sings your praise”.

****

Kathisma. Tone 8. Τὴν Σοφίαν καὶ Λόγον.

With the streams of your blood, Martyr of Christ, you brought about the
total drowning of impiety; with showers of grace you water rational
fields, all-honoured, in which you make the corn of faith increase;
therefore wondrously you appeared after death, a cloud raining down the
witness of your life, all-praised Champion. Intercede with Christ God to
bestow forgiveness of offences on those who celebrate with love your
holy memory.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Of the Feast.**

Revered Helen took up the hidden Cross of the Saviour with haste from
the earth, she fills the ends of the earth with joy and by the Spirit
orders sacred temples to be raised and brings the sceptre to the palace
as she cries out to her son: Open out your hands, Master, and accept the
Cross which shows your might and victories to all, and teach the nations
by grace to worship the Cross and sufferings of Christ.

****

Ode 4. Εἰσακήκοα Κύριε.

Having made yourself an unsullied mirror of godly thoughts, you shone as
a conspicuous beacon, O Martyr, in the midst of champions.

Invincible Martyr, you did not offer sacrifice to a shadowy demon, but
preferred to snatch a life-bearing death for the sake of true religion.

Among the champions, as though her body felt no pain, the blameless
Martyr, insensible to tortures, persevered in love of divine affection.

Your countenance, patient under pain, O Martyr, by blows shone radiantly
; while you blackened the mind of the foe with the lightning ash of the
divine Spirit.

****

Theotokion.

O God, as you are without sin, bestow on us pardon of offences, and make
your world peaceful, at the prayers of her who bore you.

****

Ode 5. Ὀρθρίζοντες βοῶμέν σοι.

Knowing him to be the opponent of day and of peace, you did not deign to
love the demon, friend of war.

When he thought to destroy your inspired courage, O Martyr, the all-evil
one became a laughing stock with his devices.

Grant me enlightenment, All-praised, and peace; abolishing by your
prayers tumultuous ignorance.

****

Theotokion.

We hymn you, Mother of God, as virgin after child-birth, for you bore in
the flesh for the world God the Word.

****

Ode 6. Χιτῶνά μοι παράσχου.

Bearing a manly attitude of soul in a woman’s flesh, glorious Martyr,
you despised the beasts in the waters.

You conquered the proud scorn of tyrants, invincible Martyr, remaining
unharmed in the waters with the wild beasts, like Jonas.

The Lord hearkening to your supplication, delivered you from destruction
by wild beasts, like Daniel from the den, O all-praised.

****

Theotokion.

You alone bore the Word in flesh through a word: deliver our souls from
the snares of the foe, we beg.

****

The Irmos.

Grant me a tunic of light, most merciful, Christ our God, who are
clothed in light as in a garment.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Ὁ ὑψωθεὶς ἐν τῷ Σταυρῷ.

In your contest you struggled nobly, and after death you hallow us by
the streams of your wonders, all-praised Martyr; therefore we honour
your holy falling asleep, as we stand with faith around your honoured
relics, that we may be delivered from sicknesses of soul and draw the
grace of wonders.

****

The Ikos.

The temple of the all-praised Martyr has been declared a Paradise,
having gained in its midst a plant of immortality, her honoured body.
Those who gather its ripe fruits are immediately sanctified, while as
they look on they marvel how a dead body, as though alive, gushes forth
blood which anoints all. And so with haste come all with lowly me and
purified from every stain, let us embrace it and draw the grace of
wonders.

**Synaxarion.**

On the 16th of the same month, commemoration of the Holy and all-praised
Great Martyr Efphemia.

She lived in the times of Diocletian; arrested because of her confession
of Christ, she was subjected to fire and wheels and again to other
instruments of torture and offered as fodder to lions; and from all
these by the grace of Christ, she remained unharmed; in the theatre
itself she rendered up her soul to the Lord.

****

Verses.  

Slain by a bear’s fangs for the sake of God,  
With praises \[*efphemiais*\] Efphemia should be your crown.  
And on the sixteenth day a with its fangs bear slew Efphemia.

On the same day, commemoration of the holy Martyr Melitini.

She was from Markianoupolis in Thrace in the reign of Antoninus, in the
governorship of Antiochus; she suffered many dreadful things and worked
very many signs (for she brought down the idols by prayer and smashed in
an instant Apollo and Herakles). After bringing many to Christ her head
was cur off. But before she was beheaded she had been entrusted to the
wife of the governor, to be instructed by her, and she had made her a
Christian. After she had been beheaded her precious body was left
unburied, but a certain Akakios, a Macedonian, passing through on his
way to his home country, asked for her remains. The governor, suspecting
nothing, allowed him to take them. So he took them and placing in a bag
hastened home; but falling ill at sea, he died. The ship having run
ashore on a headland in Lemnos, the holy body of the Martyr was laid to
rest there and beside it Akakios, lover of martyrs.

****

Verses.  

Her head struck off by sword, Melitini  
Offered her blood to Christ as honey \[*meli*\] sweet.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. Οἱ ἐκ τῆς Ἰουδαίας

The courageous deeds of the godly Martyrs appeared beyond understanding;
for the Creator of all things submits creation to those who in the
contest cry out: God of our fathers, blessed are you\!

The revered Maiden stopped the prattling mouths of tyrants with their
lawless pedantries as she sang out in the Holy Spirit: God of our
fathers, blessed are you\!

The trinity of Saints of old burned those who stoked the furnace; while
now the inspired Martyr, as she hymned the Trinity, caught them alive as
servants who hymned the God of the fathers to the ages.

The Bridegroom, mystically approaching the all-pure bride in the
furnace, by the dew of the Spirit and the good pleasure of the Father
saved her as she sang: God of our fathers, blessed are you\!

****

Theotokion.

As you wished to dispense our salvation, O Saviour, you made your
dwelling in the womb of the Virgin and declared her to be the world’s
protector. God of our fathers, blessed are you\!

****

Ode 8. Τὸν Βασιλέα.

Most blessed among women, with the grace of the Most High instead of a
dowry, in hymns you praised Christ to the ages.

Straining your thought with immaterial love for the bridegroom, you gave
your body to death and you live to the ages.

Armed against error as against a wild beast with the Holy Spirit, the
Martyr carried off the prize to all the ages.

You did not choose a soul-destroying fate, but through the bite of a
wild beast you changed it, blameless one, for life that does not grow
old to the ages.

****

Theotokion.

O Virgin, do not despise those who ask help from you as they praise and
highly exalt you, Maiden, to the ages.

****

The Irmos.

The King of heaven, whom hosts of Angels praise, praise and highly exalt
to all the ages.

****

Ode 9. Σὲ τὴν ἀπειρόγαμον.

The flow of living blood is a proof, all-praised Martyr, of the
immaculate life that has been given you from above; for you have been
revealed as an inexhaustible treasury of healings for those who draw
from it with faith.

Death touched you, God-inspired, by nature’s law; but you have been
clothed dispassionately with the death that bears life, by which, having
assumed complete purity as a spiritual body, you live incorruptibly, and
the streams of your blood bear witness.

Crowned by the laws of the contest, Efphemia, Martyr, herald of Christ,
you devoutly confirmed the volume of honoured doctrines; grasping it
from the hands of the fathers of the Council you are revealed as a
living monument of orthodoxy.

****

Theotokion.

Bride who knew not wedlock, as the true and blameless vessel of sweet
fragrance and cloud of immaterial light, which received the heavenly
rain in its womb, Virgin mother, we magnify you.

****

The Irmos.

Mother of God most high, you are higher than the immaculate Powers, you
knew not wedlock and through a word bore beyond understanding him who is
truly God, with never silent hymns of glory we magnify you.

****

Exapostilarion. Τῶν Μαθητῶν.

Assembled we praise the memory of the all-praised Martyr Efphemia; for
she took from the fathers the definition of orthodoxy, and by keeping it
she makes the orthodox radiant.

****

Of the Cross. Same melody.

The Cross is the salvation of the world; the Cross is the staff of
Saints; the cross is the support of Kings; the Cross is the stronghold
of believers; the Cross is the strength of humans; the Cross is the
downfall of demons.

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Stichera, and sing the following Idiomels of the
Saint.

Tone 3.

Believers, as we contemplate the champion’s festival being celebrated,
let us sing a hymn of thanksgiving to God, wonderful in his counsels;
for by woman’s nature he defeated the invisible might of the hostile
power, perfecting his own divine power in the weakness of the fair
Martyr. At her intercessions, save our souls.

**(Twice)**

The Same Tone.

The all-praised Martyr of Christ, having mingled the mixing bowl of
truth with her own blood from the contest, and offered it everflowing to
the Church, in which she urges on the nurselings of true religion, as
with a voice of wisdom she says: Draw out a drink, witness of the
resurrection, cleanser of passions, protection of devout souls, as you
cry to the Saviour: You have given us to drink of the stream of the
delight of the spirit; save our souls.

****

The Same Tone.

We, whose souls have been sealed with the blood of Christ for a day of
redemption, let us prophetically draw out with spiritual joy holy blood,
which gushes up for us from a martyr’s source, formed like the Saviour’s
sufferings which flow with life and his eternal glory. And so we cry
aloud to him: Lord, who are glorified in your Saints, at the prayers of
your all-praised Martyr save our souls.

Glory. **

**Tone 6. By Monk John.**

The virgin, champion and Martyr stands at the Saviour’s right hand robed
with the invincibility of the virtues and adorned with the oil of purity
and the blood of the contest, and holding her lamp she cries out to him:
I have run in the fragrance of your sweet myrrh, Christ God, for I am
wounded with your love, do not part me from you, heavenly Bridegroom. At
her entreaties, all-powerful Saviour, send down to us your mercies.

Both now. **

**Same Tone.**

Today the plant of life, rising from the hidden places of the earth,
confirms the resurrection of Christ who was nailed to it; and exalted in
sacred hands it proclaims his exaltation up to heaven, through which our
matter, from its fall to earth, lives as a citizen of heaven. And so let
us cry aloud with thanksgiving: Lord, who were exalted upon it and
through it have exalted us with you, count us who sing your praise
worthy of heavenly joy.

****

At the Aposticha. Tone 6. Τριήμερος ἀνέστης.

Let us worship the place where the feet of Christ have stood as we lift
high the thrice blessed Cross, on which the Master’s blood was emptied
out, pouring forth resurrection for the world.

****

Verse:

Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy.

Having put to death the passions of flesh and spirit, let us be eager to
be lifted up from earth to a part in heaven by the exaltation of Cross,
having being crucified with the Master Christ.

****

Verse:

** God is our King for ever; he has wrought salvation in the midst of
the earth.

A source owing with life clearly gushed from the Saviour’s side,
watering the souls of those who in faith worship his divine passion, and
his Cross and Resurrection.

Glory. **

**Tone 1. By Vyzantios.**

Today choirs of Fathers, assembled, All-praised, for the sake of Christ,
bring you the volume of the orthodox faith; which you took in your
honoured hands and guard to the end. Therefore we choirs of mortals have
come together and honour your struggle as we devoutly cry aloud: Hail,
all-praised, who guarded unharmed the orthodox faith handed down by the
Fathers; hail, who intercede on behalf of our souls.

****

Both now. Of the Feast. Same Tone.  
By Andrew of Jerusalem.

Today truly the holy utterance of David has reached its term; for see,
we manifestly worship the footstool of your immaculate feet.; and hoping
in the shadow of your wings, O all-compassionate, we cry aloud to you:
Let the light of your face be signed upon us, and exalt the horn of
orthodox Christians by the exaltation of your precious Cross, O Christ
most merciful.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 07 December 2006**

