\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](saintsof.md) \]
\[ [September](septembe.md) \] \[ October \]
\[ [November](november.md) \] \[ [December](december.md) \]
\[ [January](january.md) \] \[ [February](feb.md) \]
\[ [June](june.md) \] \[ [July](july.md) \] \[ [August](august.md) \]

MONTH OF OCTOBER
================

**It has 31 days. The day has 11 hours and the night 13.**

1.

**The Protecting Veil of Our Holy Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin
Mary** \[See the Appendix, at the end of the page\]. Of the holy Apostle
Ananias, one of the Seventy; and the venerable Deacon Romanos the
Singer. ****

Ananias came from Damascus, where, through a divine revelation, he
baptized the Apostle Paul in the year 36. He finished his course as a
martyr, being stoned under the governor Lucian.

****

Romanos flourished around 496, in the reign of Anastasios. He came from
Emesa in Syria and had been deacon of the church of Beirut. He was the
first writer of Kontakia, and the very first which he composed was that
for the Nativity of Christ, ‘To-day the Virgin gives birth’.

****

Apolytikia: of the Apostle. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostle Ananias, intercede with the merciful God to grant our souls
forgiveness of sins.

****

Of the Saint. Tone 8. In you, Mother. \[Common\]

In you, Father, was preserved unimpaired that which is according to the
image, for you took up the cross, and you followed Christ; and by your
deeds you have taught us to despise the flesh, for it passes away; but
to care for the soul, which is a thing immortal; and therefore your
spirit, holy Romanos, rejoices with the Angels.

****

Kontakion of the Apostle. Tone 2. Nor tomb nor death \[Aug. 15th\].

Most fervent helper in intercessions and swift to answer those who ask,
accept our prayer, Ananias, and implore Christ, who alone is glorified
among the saints, to have mercy on us.

****

Of St Romanos. To you, my Champion. \[By Monk Gerasimos\]

As wisdom’s all melodious harp, expounder of ascents inspired by God, we
praise you, Romanos, with holy songs. But as a lyre of gifts beyond our
ken, to godly wakefulness rouse us who cry to you, ‘Hail, Father
possessed by God!’

2\. Of the holy Bishop Martyr Cyprian and the holy Virgin Martyr Justina.

****

Justina was from Damascus and had dedicated her virginity to Christ;
**Cyprian** came from Antioch in the region of Coele-Syria and Arabia
and was given to magic and was a worshipper of demons. He learned their
impotence because having tried all his craft in order to entice Justina
to love, he was smitten by the sign of the Cross and acknowledged the
truth. He abandoned demonic error and came to Christ; he burned all his
magic books, was baptized and later succeeded to the episcopal throne of
his native country. He was arrested with Justina by the count of
Damascus. They both endured numerous tortures at his hands and were sent
finally to Diocletian at Nikomedia, where their heads were cut off in
around the year 304.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. You shared their way of life. \[Common\]

You shared their way of life and you succeeded to the Apostles’ thrones;
you found the practice, O God-inspired, to climb the heights of
contemplation; rightly proclaiming the word of truth; and in faith you
struggled to shedding of blood, Bishop and Martyr Cyprian; intercede
with Christ God that our souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion. Tone 1. The angelic choir \[The soldiers watching\].

From the magic art, O Cyprian inspired by God, you turned to the
knowledge of God, and you were declared a wise healer for the world,
granting cures to those who honour you with Justina. With her intercede
with the Master who loves humankind that your servants may be saved.

3\. Of the holy Bishop and Martyr Dionysios the Areopagite.

He was an Athenian, a learned man and one of the councillors of the
famous court of the Areopagos; hence he is called the Areopagite. He
first believed in Christ in the year 50, when Paul preached in Athens,
of which he was appointed by him as its first bishop, in the opinion of
some people. Others, doubtless correctly, say that he was the second,
and the successor of Hierotheos, whom Dionysios calls his friend and
teacher after Paul (*On the Names of God,* 3.2). According to an ancient
tradition he died a martyr in Athens in around the year 96.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4.

You were taught goodness and, sober in all things, you vested yourself
in a good conscience as befitted a priest. You drew ineffable mysteries
from the Vessel of election, kept the faith and finished the same course
as his, Bishop and Martyr Dionysios. Intercede with Christ God that our
souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. To you, my Champion.

You passed through the gates of heaven, having become the disciple of
the Apostle who reached beyond the third heaven, Dionysios. You were
enriched with complete knowledge of ineffable mysteries and shed your
rays on those who had previously slept in the darkness of ignorance. And
so we cry: Hail, universal Father.

4\. Of our father among the Saints Hierotheos, bishop of Athens.

In the opinion of some he was also a member of the court of the
Areopagus. When he had been instructed in faith in Christ by Paul, he
was ordained as bishop of Athens. It was he again who initiated the
godly Dionysios more completely into the truths concerning Christ.
Dionysios later explained his comprehensive and summary teachings more
clearly and exactly. He was brought by a cloud to the Dormition of the
Mother of God, when he, after the Apostles, was the initiator of the
divine hymns. ‘Wholly absent from, wholly outside himself and
experiencing communion in things that are celebrated in hymns, and held
to be by divine inspiration the hymnwriter of all that he had heard and
seen, of things known and unknown’ as Dionysios himself says (*On the
Names of God,* 3.2). After a good and holy life he went to his rest in
the Lord.

It is worth noticing here that in the sacred songs for the feast of the
Dormition of the Mother of God the hymnwriters have borrowed a great
deal word for word from the above chapter by Dionysios.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4.

You were taught goodness and, sober in all things, you vested yourself
in a good conscience as befitted a priest. You drew ineffable mysteries
from the Vessel of election, kept the faith and finished the same course
as his, Bishop and Martyr Hierotheos. Intercede with Christ God that our
souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. To you, my Champion.

We praise you as Athens’ high priest, as we have been initiated through
you into strange and ineffable mysteries; for you were declared to be a
hymn writer inspired by God. But all-blest Hierotheos intercede that we
may be delivered from every kind of sin, that we may cry: Hail, inspired
Father.

****

5\. Of the holy martyr Charitini.

She was martyred under Diocletian in 290.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed. \[Common\]

O Jesu, your lamb cries aloud: O my Bridegroom, I long for you; and
seeking you I struggle, and I am crucified and buried with you in your
baptism; and I suffer for your sake, that I may reign with you; and I
die for you, that I may live in you; but as a spotless victim now accept
one who with longing is slain for you. Through her prayers, as you are
merciful, save our souls!

6\. Of the holy, glorious Apostle Thomas.

His name means Twin. He was one of the Twelve and came from Galilee. He
preached to the Parthians, Persians, Medes and Indians, by whom he was
tortured and died as a martyr, possibly in the city of Meliapur, or
Maliapur, according to some, and which is still called St Thomas. It
lies on the eastern side of the Indian peninsula of Coromandel.

****

Permission for wine and oil

Apolytikion. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostle Thomas, intercede with the merciful God to grant our souls
forgiveness of sins.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

Filled with God’s grace Christ’s Apostle and true servant cried in
repentance: You are my God and Lord.

7\. Of the holy martyrs Sergios and Bacchos.

They suffered in Rome under the Emperor Maximianus, around 296.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggles obtained the crown of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

Let us assemble to crown with holy praises the noble Martyrs and
brothers in the faith, Sergios, stout soldier of the Trinity, and
Bacchos, who bravely fought beside him in tortures, as they hymned
Christ, the Prizegiver and Creator of the universe.

8\. Of our venerable mother Pelagia.

She was from Antioch and lived around 284. At first she was a pagan and
lived a dissolute life. But after she had been catechized and baptized
by a certain bishop Nonnos, she left for the Mount of Olives, where she
spent the rest of her life in sanctity and died in peace.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 8. Model Melody. \[Common\]

In you, Mother, was preserved unimpaired that which is according to the
image, for you took up the cross, and you followed Christ; and by your
deeds you have taught us to despise the flesh, for it passes away; but
to care for the soul, which is a thing immortal; and therefore your
spirit, holy Pelagia, rejoices with the Angels.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.

You wore out your body with fasts, vigils and prayers as you besought
the Creator for complete forgiveness for your deeds. This, Mother, you
truly obtained and you showed the way of repentance.

9\. Of the holy Apostle James, son of Alphaios; and of our venerable
father Andronikos.

The Apostle **James** was one of the Twelve. He preached Christ to many
nations and suffered death by crucifixion.

****

Andronikos was from Antioch. He died after a life of asceticism around
500.

****

Apolytikia: of the Apostle. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostle James, intercede with the merciful God to grant our souls
forgiveness of sins.

****

Of the Saint. Tone 1. When the stone had been sealed. \[Common\]

Citizen of the desert and Angel embodied, and wonder-worker you have
been declared, O God-bearing father Andronikos. By fasting, and by
vigil, and by prayers receiving gifts of grace from heaven, you heal the
sick and the souls of those who have recourse to you in faith. Glory to
him who gave you strength; glory to him who crowned you; glory to him
who through you works healing for all!

****

Kontakion of the Apostle. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

James was revealed as a wondrous fisherman of the nations and most
honoured of disciples, companion of the Apostles. He dispenses to the
world the wealth of healings, he frees from troubles those who praise
him. And so with one accord we cry to him: Save us all, O Apostle, by
your prayers.

10\. Of the holy martyrs Evlampios and Evlampia his sister.

They were from Nikomedia. They suffered under Maximianus in the year
296.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

Let us honour the noble Martyrs, brother and sister in the flesh, the
wise Evlampios and Evlampia; for they put to shame the devices of
tyrants through the power of the Crucified; and so have been declared
the glory and boast of Martyrs.

11\. Of the holy Apostle Philip, one of the Seventy; and of our venerable
father Theophanes the Branded.

****

Philip was from Caesarea in Palestine and had seven daughters, who were
prophetesses. He preached in Samaria in 35. He met the eunuch of
Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was reading the prophet Isaias,
and when he had instructed him he baptized him. Later he preached among
the Trallians in Asia, where he died.

****

Theophanes was a Palestinian and brother of Theodore the branded. Both
were monks of the monastery of St Sabbas. They were called ‘Branded’
because Theophilos, the last of the iconoclast emperors, had inscribed
on their foreheads with a red hot iron thirteen lines of iambics and
sent them into exile, where Theodore died, probably in 823. Theophanes,
however, who was born in 778, outlived the death of Theophilos in 842
and was elected metropolitan of Nicea. He died on the 11th of October in
845. Both wrote numerous Canons and Hymns, which adorn the services of
the Church.

****

Apolytikia: of the Apostle. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostle Philip, intercede with the merciful God to grant our souls
forgiveness of sins.

****

Of the Saint. Tone 8. Orthodoxy’s guide. \[Common\]

Orthodoxy’s guide, teacher of piety and reverence, beacon of the world,
fair ornament of high priests, O wise Theophanes, inspired by God, by
your teaching you have enlightened all, O harp of the Spirit; intercede
with Christ God that our souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion of the Apostle. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

Enlightened by the all-holy Spirit you enlighten the whole earth by your
teachings and the brightness of your wonders, O sacred initiate, Apostle
Philip.

****

Of the Saint. Same melody.

You dawned on the Church like a second sun, venerable Theophanes,
enlightening her with the beams of your teachings as a priest of Christ
our God.

NOTE

****

On the eleventh of this month, if it falls on a Sunday, or on the first
Sunday following it, is sung the office of the 367 Holy Fathers, who
assembled in the 7th Ecumenical Council at Nicea against the
iconoclasts, in the reign of the Empress Irene and of her son,
Constantine Porphyrogenitos.

Sunday of the Holy Fathers of the 7th Ecumenical Council.

****

Apolytikia: of the Resurrection; and of the Fathers. Tone 8.

You are glorified above all, Christ our God, who established our Fathers
as beacons on the earth, and through them guided us all to the true
faith: Greatly compassionate Lord, glory to you!

****

Kontakion. Tone 8.

The preaching of the Apostles and the doctrines of the Fathers sealed
for the Church the faith as one; wearing the robe of truth, woven from
contemplation on high, she rightly proclaims and glorifies the great
Mystery of true religion.

****

Or: Kontakion. Tone 2. Not honouring an image made by hands.

The Son who shone ineffably from the Father, was born twofold in nature
from a woman; knowing him we do not deny the representation of his form;
but depicting it devoutly, we honour it faithfully; and so, holding to
the true faith, the Church, greets the image of Christ’s incarnation.

12\. Of the holy martyrs Probus, Tarachos and Andronikos.

They suffered under Diocletian in 296.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 5. Let us believers.

The Powers of heaven marvelled at the achievements of the holy Martyrs,
because by the power of the Cross they struggled nobly and invisibly
overcame while in mortal bodies the bodiless foe; and they intercede
with the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things above.

The noble soldiers of Christ, the godly Martyrs Probus, Andronikos and
Tarachos, have shown us the glory of the Trinity; they confounded all
the godlessness of the tyrants as in the faith they nobly struggled.

13\. Of the holy martyrs Karpos, Papylos, Agathodoros and Agathoniki.

****

Karpos was Bishop of the Church of Thyateira, **Papylos** a deacon,
**Agathodoros** their slave, while **Agathoniki** was Papylos’ sister.
They suffered under Decius at Sardis in Lydia around 250.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

As a precious treasure and a spring flowing with streams of healings the
Master has granted your relics to those on earth; they cleanse diseases
of every kind and give grace to souls in a never-ending stream; and so
with one accord, Karpos and Papylos we celebrate with love your
festival.

14\. Of the holy Martyrs Nazarius, Gervase, Protasius and Celsius; and of
our venerable father Kosmas of the Holy City, the poet, Bishop of
MaÃ¯ouma.

All the Martyrs suffered at Milan under Nero in 64.

****

Kosmas was a native of the Holy City, that is Jerusalem. He was a
contemporary and the same age as John of Damascus (December 4th), with
whom he was brought up, having been adopted because he had been orphaned
by the latter’s father Sergius. He was also his fellow student under the
same teacher. In about 743 he was consecrated bishop of Maiouma, a
coastal city of Palestine, which, having been formerly subject to Gaza,
was known as the harbour of the Gazeans. But under Constantine the Great
it was completely rebuilt and named Constantia, after his son
Constantine (Sozomen, *History of the Church* 5.3). Kosmas became a fine
hymn-writer, and is therefore called both ‘poet’ and ‘melodist’

. ****

Apolytikion of the Martyrs. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

And of the Saint. Tone 8. Orthodoxy’s guide. \[Common\]

Orthodoxy’s guide, teacher of piety and reverence, beacon of the world,
fair ornament of high priests, O wise Kosmas, inspired by God, by your
teaching you have enlightened all, O harp of the Spirit; intercede with
Christ God that our souls may be saved.

****

Kontakia: of the Martyrs. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.

Appearing as shining lamps, godly Martyrs, you flood all creation with
the light of your wonders, as you destroy on every occasion the deep
night of diseases and implore Christ, the only God, to grant us mercy.

****

And of the Saint. Tone 8. To you, my Champion.

Adorned with virtues, O Kosmas inspired by God, you have become an
adornment of Christ’s church, which you have adorned with hymns, blest
Saint. But intercede with the Lord that we may be delivered from every
wile of the opponent who cry to you: Hail, thrice-happy Father!

15\. Of the holy martyr Lucian, presbyter of the Church of Antioch.

He was from Samosata of devout parents. He opened the catechetical
school of Antioch where he taught the orthodox doctrines of the faith
and explained the difficult passages of the divine Scriptures. He
translated the Old Testament from the Hebrew and produced a first class
edition of the text, purged of any trace of heresy. He went to Nikomedia
to encourage the faithful to struggle for the sake of Christ and was
denounced to Maximus; to whom he spoke with great boldness and made a
defence of the faith of the Christians. He was condemned to prison,
where he died from starvation and thirst in 311.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

16\. Of the holy martyr Longinus the Centurion at the Cross.

It was he who served under Pilate during the passion of the Saviour
Christ, over whom he kept guard by the Cross. When he saw the earthquake
and all that took place, he cried out in fear: ‘Truly this man was the
son of God’ (Matt. 27:54). After the Resurrection he abandoned his
military career and returned to his native country of Cappadocia, where
he preached Christ. He was taken through the activity of Pilate for
Tiberius Caesar and beheaded.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

Gladly the Church rejoices at the commemoration to-day of the revered
champion, Longinus, as she cries: You, Christ, are my might and my
stronghold!

17\. Of the holy Prophet Osee \[Hosea\]; and of the holy monk-martyr
Andrew of Krisis.

****

Andrew came from the island of Crete, where he led the ascetic life.
Under the emperor Constantine Copronymous he left for Constantinople and
there suffered much for the honour of the holy icons. Finally as he was
being dragged through the market place with his feet bound, he was
struck with a butcher’s axe by a certain fishmonger, and so gave up his
spirit to God in the year 761. He holy remains were laid up in a place
called Krisis.

****

Osee was from the tribe of Issachar, or rather that of Ruben, a son of
Beiri, and is first in order of the twelve Minor Prophets, and the
oldest of them. He prophesied for more than sixty nine years. He lived
for more than eighty, between 810 and 720 BC. His prophecy is divided
into fourteen chapters.

****

Apolytikion of the Martyr. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

Trained by the ascetic life on the mountain, with the panoply of the
Cross you destroyed the spiritual assaults of hostile powers, blest
Saint. Again you bravely stripped for combat and slew Copronymous with
the sword of faith; for both struggles you have been crowned by God, as
monk and martyr, honoured Andrew.

****

Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

Today the Queen of cities celebrates the radiant feast of your
light-bearing memory, and invites to join her every city and country.
She rejoices for she has gained a great treasure: your body of many
struggles, blest Andrew, beacon of orthodoxy.

18\. Of the holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke.

He was from Antioch, a doctor by profession, disciple and travelling
companion of Paul, at whose suggestion he wrote the Gospel that bears
his name, after Matthew and Mark, around the year 60 AD. Then he wrote
the Acts of the Apostles, dedicating both books (in the opinion of some
people) to the governor or Achaia, Theohilos. He lived more than 80
years and died in Achaia, possibly at Patras, the metropolis of that
province. The emblem on his icon is the Ox, the third of the symbolic
living creatures of Ezekiel \[1,10\], because his Gospel starts from the
worship under the old law, under which oxen were frequently offered in
sacrifice.

****

Permission for wine and oil

Apolytikion. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostle and Evangelist Luke, intercede with the merciful God to
grant our souls forgiveness of sins.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

You became a disciple of the divine Word, and with Paul you led the
whole world to he light and dispelled the gloom by writing the Gospel of
Christ.

19\. Of the holy Prophet Joel; and of the holy Martyr Varus.

****

Varus competed under Maximianus in 304.

****

Joel was of the tribe of Reuben, son of Bathouel, 818-750 BC. His
prophecy is divided into 3 chapters and is placed second among the Minor
Prophets.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

20\. Of the holy great Martyr Artemios; and of our venerable and
god-bearing father Gerasimos the new ascetic of the island of
Kephallenia.

****

Artemios lived in the reign of Constantine the Great and was appointed
by him as governor of Alexandria. He was later honoured with the rank of
Patrician. In the reign of Julian the Apostate, who was punishing the
Christians, in the year 361 Artemios with outspoken boldness rebuked his
apostasy. And so, after suffering many torments, his head was cut off.

****

Gerasimos was a Peloponnesian by birth, son of Demetrios and Kali, by
whom he was devoutly brought up and taught the sacred scriptures. He
left his native country and after journeying through various places,
reached Kephallenia. There he restored an old church and round it built
a nunnery, which survives to this day, in a place called Omala. Here he
ended the ascetic course of his life in 1579. His holy relics, which
have remained incorrupt, are exposed to the faithful for their
sanctification.

****

Apolytikia: of the Martyr. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

****

And of the Saint. Tone 1.

A champion of the Orthodox and angel in the flesh, a god-bearing
wonder-worker newly revealed to us, godlike Gerasimos, let us believers
praise. For worthily he received from God the ever-flowing grace of
healings from God. He gives strength to the sick and heals those
possessed by demons. And so for those who honour him he is a source of
healings.

21\. Of our venerable father Hilarion the great.

He lived for 80 years and died in 333.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 8. Model Melody. \[Common\]

With the streams of your tears you cultivated the barren desert, and
with your deep groans you made your toils bring forth fruit a
hundredfold, and you have become a beacon, shining in all the world by
your wonders: Venerable Father Hilarion, intercede with Christ God that
our souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

As an unsetting beacon of the spiritual Sun, assembled to-day we praise
you in hymns; for you shone out for those in the darkness of ignorance,
leading all to the heights of God, O Hilarion, as they cried: Hail
Father, rampart of Ascetics!

22\. Of the holy equal of the Apostles Averkios, Bishop of Hierapolis,
the wonder-worker; and of the seven holy youths of Ephesus, Maximilian,
Iamblichos, Martinianus, Dionysios, Antony, Exakoustodian and
Constantine.

****

Averkios flourished around 186.

The **Seven Youths** fell asleep in a cave in 250 and slept for 184
years, until the reign of Theodosios the Less. When they had awoken, or
risen again, and by divine command slumbered for a little, they departed
to the Lord in 434.

****

Apolytikia: of the Saint. Tone 4. The truth of your actions. \[Common\]

The truth of your actions proclaimed you to your flock as a rule of
faith, an image of meekness and a teacher of self-control; and so you
gained through humility the things on high, through poverty riches, O
Father and Hierarch Averkios; intercede with Christ God that our souls
may be saved.

****

Of the Martyrs. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. As first fruits of nature.

The whole Church of the faithful honours you, Averkios, as a great high
priest and fellow of the Apostles: by your entreaties guard her
unconquered, unshaken and undisturbed by any heresy, O blessed and
most-admirable.

23\. Of the holy Apostle James, the Lord’s brother, first bishop of
Jerusalem.

According to some he was the son of Joseph the Betrothed, by the wife
the latter had before he was betrothed to the Ever-virgin. He was
therefore known as her son and the Lord’s brother, just as He was
considered to be Joseph’s son (*Matt. 13:55*). According to others he
was Joseph’s nephew, the son of Joseph’s brother Cleopas or Clopas, who
was also called Alphaeus, and of his wife Mary, who was the sister, or
rather the first cousin, of the Mother of God. But he was again called
the Lord’s brother because of this relationship, in accordance with the
idiom of Holy Scripture.

By one of the Evangelists (*Mark 15.40*) he is therefore called ‘James
the Less’, to distinguish him from James the son of Zebedee, who is
called ‘the Great’. He was appointed the first bishop of Jerusalem in
34, having been chosen for the episcopal throne, according to some, by
the Lord himself; but according to Eusebius, by the Apostles. He was
nicknamed ‘Olvias’, that is to say ‘just’, because of his outstanding
holiness and justice. He climbed to the pinnacle of the temple, that is
to the highest point of its roof, on the day of Pascha to the amazement
of all, and from there he gave what they sought of him: a testimony
concerning Jesus. He proclaimed in a loud voice that Jesus is seated on
the right hand of the Great Power, and is going to come on the clouds of
heaven. At this testimony many of those present shouted out: ‘Hosanna to
the son of David!’. But the scribes and Pharisees cried: ‘Ah! Even the
Just has been led astray!’ and on the orders of the High Priest Annanas
he was cast down from there and then stoned as he prayed for his
murderers. His head was crushed with a fuller’s board, and so he
breathed his last in the year 62 (Eusebius, *History of the Church,*
II.23). The first of the Catholic Epistles to the Jews in the diaspora
was written by this James.

****

Permission for wine and oil.

Apolytikion. Tone 4.

As the Lord’s disciple, O Just one, you received the Gospel; as a Martyr
you have unflinching courage; as God’s brother, boldness; as a High
Priest, power to intercede. Intercede with Christ God that our souls may
be saved.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

When the only-begotten of the Father, God the Word, came to live among
in these last days, he declared you, venerable James, to be first
shepherd and teacher of Jerusalem and faithful steward of the spiritual
Mysteries; and so we all honour you, Apostle.

24\. Of the holy Martyr Arethas and his companions.

They were martyred in 542 at Negra \[Najran\], a city in Arabia Felix.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 1. Be entreated. \[Common\]

Be entreated by the sufferings, which the Saints endured for you, O
Lord; and heal all our pains, we beg, O Lover of mankind.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Today you have appeared.

To-day a herald of joy, the light-bearing feast of the Champions, has
come to us; as we hymn it we glorify the Lord who is in the highest.

25\. Of the holy Martyrs and notaries Markianos and Martyrios.

They were put to death by the Arians in Constantinople in 346.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggles obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

Competing well since childhood, Markianos with wise Martyrios, you
overthrew the apostate Arius and kept the orthodox faith unharmed as you
followed Paul, the wise teacher; and so you have found life with him as
noble champions of the Trinity.

26\. Of the holy Great Martyr Demetrios Myrovlitis; and commemoration of
the Great Earthquake.

The latter occurred at Constantinople in 741, the 24th year of the reign
of Leo the Isaurian, the first of the iconoclast emperors.

Saint **Demetrios** was from Thessaloniki, a most devout son of devout
parents and a teacher of Christ’s faith. And so, when Maximianos came to
Thessaloniki in 290, Demetrios was arrested by him and kept chained in
prison. Games were being held in the city and Maximianos was present as
a spectator. A certain barbarian, a friend of the Emperor’s and a noted
wrestler, named Lyaios, outstanding both for his physical bulk and his
strength, was vaunting himself in the stadium and challenging the
citizens to wrestle with him. All those who took up the challenge he
threw. Seeing this a certain youth named Nestor, an acquaintance of
Saint Demetrios, came to him in the prison and asked for his blessing
for single combat. This he received by being signed with the precious
Cross. Then he entered the stadium and cried boldly: ‘O God of
Demetrios, help me!’ He got a hold on Lyaios and striking him a timely
blow below the heart, he left the former champion lifeless on the
ground. Maximianos, greatly grieved at this, when he learned the reason,
ordered Demetrios to be run through at once with lances in the prison
where he was being held, but Nestor he slew with his own sword.

****

Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 3. Your confession.

The whole world has found you as a mighty champion in dangers, O victor,
who rout the nations. Therefore, as you destroyed the pride of Lyaios in
the stadium by giving Nestor courage, holy Great Martyr Demetrios,
implore Christ God to grant us his great mercy.

****

And of the Earthquake. Tone 8.

Christ, our God, who look upon the earth and make it tremble, deliver us
from the fearful threat of earthquake, and send down upon us your rich
mercies, at the prayers of the Mother of God, O only lover of mankind.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Model Melody.

With the streams of your blood, Demetrios, God has dyed the Church in
purple, the God who gives you unconquerable might and keeps your City
unharmed, for your are its strength.

27\. Of the holy Martyr Nestor.

He suffered under Maximianos, as stated above under the 26th.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

****

Or: Apolytikion of the Saint. Tone 3. Your confession.

The whole world has found you as a mighty champion in dangers, O victor,
who rout the nations. Therefore, as you destroyed the pride of Lyaios in
the stadium by giving Nestor courage, holy Great Martyr Demetrios,
implore Christ God to grant us his great mercy.

****

Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things on high..

You struggled nobly and have now inherited immortal fame; at the prayers
of the Martyr Demetrios you became a valiant soldier of the Master. With
him, wise Nestor, do not cease to intercede on behalf of us all.

28\. Of the holy martyrs Terence and Neonilla, his wife, and of their
seven children, Savilos, Nitas, Ierax, Theodoulos, Photios, Vili and
Evniki; and of our venerable Father Stephen the Sabbaite.

Their country and the date of their martyrdom are uncertain. They were
all beheaded after enduring bitter tortures.

Saint **Stephen** passed his life in asceticism in the monastery of St
Sabbas; hence he was named ‘Sabbaite’. Here he was ordained bishop. He
died around 790, leaving the Church a number of poetic troparia.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

And of the Saint. Tone 8. Orthodoxy’s guide. \[Common\]

Orthodoxy’s guide, teacher of piety and reverence, beacon of the world,
fair ornament of high priests, O wise Stephen, inspired by God, by your
teaching you have enlightened all, O harp of the Spirit; intercede with
Christ God that our souls may be saved.

29\. Of the holy virgin martyr Anastasia the Roman; and of our venerable
father Avramios.

****

Anastasia was arrested while still young and living in a monastery. She
confessed Christ with boldness and when she had endured many forms of
torture she was beheaded in 256, under Valerian and Gallienus.

Saint **Avramios** died in about 390.

****

Apolytikia. Of the Saint. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed. \[Common\]

O Jesu, your lamb cries aloud: O my Bridegroom, I long for you; and
seeking you I struggle, and I am crucified and buried with you in your
baptism; and I suffer for your sake, that I may reign with you; and I
die for you, that I may live in you; but as a spotless victim now accept
one who with longing is slain for you. Through her prayers, as you are
merciful, save our souls!

****

And of the Saint. Tone 8. In you, Mother. \[Common\]

In you, Father, was preserved unimpaired that which is according to the
image, for you took up the cross, and you followed Christ; and by your
deeds you have taught us to despise the flesh, for it passes away; but
to care for the soul, which is a thing immortal; and therefore your
spirit, holy Avramios, rejoices with the Angels.

****

Kontakia. Of the Martyr. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

Venerable Anastasia, hallowed by streams of virginity and washed in the
blood of martyrdom, you grant healing to those in the toils of diseases
and salvation to those who approach you from the heart; for Christ, who
pours forth grace without limit, gives you strength.

****

And of the Saint. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

You appeared on earth as an angel in the flesh, and by your ascetic life
you became like a tree planted by the water of self-control and grew
well; you washed stains away with the streams of your tears. And so you
have been revealed, Avramios, as a godlike vessel of the Spirit.

30\. Of the holy martyrs Zenovios and Zenovia, his sister.

They suffered under Diocletian in 290.

****

Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, O Christ God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. As first fruits of mature..

Let us honour with inspired songs the Martyrs for truth and heralds of
true religion, the brother and sister Zenovios with Zenovia, who lived
united and who through martyrdom have received an incorruptible crown.

31\. Of the holy Apostles of the Seventy, Stachys, Apelles, Amplias,
Urban, Narcissus and Aristoboulos, and of the holy martyr Epimachos.

Of these Apostles, **Stachys** was ordained and appointed first bishop
of Byzantium by the Apostle Andrew. He shepherded his flock for 16 years
and went to his rest in the Lord. According to tradition **Apelles**
became bishop of Heracleia and died in peace. **Amplias** and **Urban**
were ordained by Andrew, the first called, Amplias as bishop of
Odyssopolis and Urban of a city in Macedonia. They were both slain by
idolaters. **Narcissus** was ordained bishop of Athens and met a
martyr’s death. **Aristoboulos** was bishop of a city whose name is
unknown. The godly Apostle Paul mentions Stachys, Amplias, Urban and
Narcissus (*Rom.* 16, 8.9.11).

The Martyr **Epimachos** was from Egypt and led the ascetic life by
mount Pelusion. He went down to Alexandria in the time of Decius, was
arrested by the governor Apellianos and underwent a martyr’s death in
251.

****

Apolytikia. Of the Apostles. Tone 3. Holy Apostle. \[Common\]

Holy Apostles, intercede with the merciful God to grant our souls
forgiveness of sins.

****

And of the Martyr. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\]

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. As first fruits of nature.

As precious treasures of the all-holy Spirit and rays of the Sun of
glory let us fittingly hymn the wise Apostles, Apelles, Urban,
Aristoboulos, Amplias, Narcissus and Stachys, whom the grace of our God
has brought together.

APPENDIX

1 \[or 28\]. The Protecting Veil of the Most Holy Mother of God. In the
Sacred Monastery of Docheiariou on Mount Athos, the holy wonder-working
Icon of the Mother of God, Gorgoypikoos \[*She who answers swiftly*\].

****

Apolytikia. \[by Monk Gerasimos\]

Tone 1. Citizen of the desert.

We sing the praise of the graces of your Protectng Veil, O Virgin, which
like a light-bearing cloud you unfold beyond understanding, and you
spiritually protect your people from every assault of their foe. For we
have gained you as Protection, defender and helper, as we cry out to
you: Glory to your mighty deeds, O Pure one; glory to your Protection;
glory to your providence towards us, O Immaculate!

****

Another. Tone 8. Mother of God Ever-Virgin.

Mother of God Ever-Virgin, you have given your holy Protection, through
which you protect those who hope in you, as a mighty refuge for your
race. For as of old so now you have wondrously saved us, enveloping your
people like a spiritual cloud. And so we implore you to grant peace to
your commonwealth, and to our souls God’s great mercy.

****

Kontakion. Tone 8. To you, my Champion. \[by Monk Gerasimos\]

Like a cloud brightly overshadowing the whole company of the Church, O
All-pure, you appeared of old in the royal City. But as Protection and
Champion of your people, protect us from every affliction as we cry to
you: Hail, Protection wholly light.

****

Of the Icon. Tone 1. Citizen of the desert. \[By Monk Gerasimos\]

Made rich by your icon that works marvels, Mother of God, as by a spring
of your spiritual graces that flows from God, we draw from it abundantly
the streams of marvels, as from Eden. For you are a helper who answers
quickly those who cry out to you, ‘Glory, pure Virgin, to gifts of
grace; glory to your virginity; glory to your ineffable care for us, O
Immaculate!’

****

Of the Icon. To you, my Champion. \[By Monk Gerasimos\]

Taking refuge in your help, O Mother of God, as in a sheltered haven we
are saved from many kinds of dangers and disease. For as a helper who
answers quickly you have appeared to those who with faith take refuge in
your Icon and who cry out to you, ‘Hail, helper of all the world!’

**In Cyprus and in some other places, on the first Sunday of October the
feast of All Saints of Cyprus is celebrated.**

**Apolytikion for the Saints of Cyprus\
Tone 1. Citizen of the desert.**

The Saints of Cyprus, Apostles and Martyrs, High Priests and Ascetics,
let us Cypriots, as is fitting, having formed a new choir, honour with
spiritual songs, as glorious adornments and defenders of the isle, as we
cry, ‘Glory to the One who made you strong! Glory to the One who crowned
you! Glory to the One who through you grants us gifts divine!’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
