\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \]
\[ [Baptism](baptism.md) \] \[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \]
\[ [Consecration of a Church](dedic-int.md) \]
\[ [Liturgy of Saint James](lit-james.md) \]
\[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \]
\[ [Canon for Confession](canon_for_confession.md) \]
\[ [Presanctified](presanctified.md) \] \[ Ordinations \]

[Presbyter](presbyter.md)\
[Deacon](deacon.md)\
[Woman Deacon](woman_deacon.md)

[]{style="FONT-SIZE: 24pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

THE ORDINATION[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}OF DEACONS AND PRESBYTERS
======================================================================

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

INTRODUCTION
------------

[]{style="FONT-SIZE: 18pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[This provisional translation of the rites for the ordination of Deacons
and Presbyters is made from the text in the *Mega Euchologion.* The
rubrics in square brackets are not in the original, but describe the
ceremony as it is actually
performed.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

ORDINATION OF A DEACON
----------------------

[]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[The Subdeacon to be ordained Deacon stands during the whole Liturgy on
the solea in front of the icon of Christ. He holds the pitcher and bowl
and the towel for the washing of the BishopÂ’s hands before the Great
Entrance. As Milton says, Â‘They also serve who only stand and
waitÂ’.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

ORDINATION OF A PRESBYTER
-------------------------

[]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[The Deacon to be ordained Presbyter acts as the first Deacon at the
Liturgy, even though more senior Deacons may also be taking part in the
Liturgy.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

ORDINATION OF A WOMAN DEACON
----------------------------

[]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[The rite for ordaining Women Deacons, or Deaconesses, is no longer in
use, though it was still in the printed *Euchologia* in the 17th
century. The present translation is made from Goar, who used the
Venetian edition of 1638 for his *Euchologion*. A number of other
versions of the rite can be found in DmitrievskyÂ’s *Eucholgia.* Whereas
in the early days of the Church women Deacons had a liturgical role in
the administration of Baptism and more generally in ministry to the
women of the congregation, analogous to that of male Deacons with regard
to the men, by the sixth century, as one of Severos of AntiochÂ’s
letters, written to an Â‘Archimanditess and DeaconessÂ’, makes clear,
the female diaconate seems to have been given more as an honour,
particularly to abbesses and senior nuns, rather than as a practical
necessity, Â“In the case of a female deacon, especially in the
monasteries, ordination is received not so much for the sake of the
requirements of the Mysteries, but for the sake of honour onlyÂ”. The
two prayers of the rite, in particular the second, seem to reflect the
monastic side of this development. There is, I think, no evidence that
women Deacons ever had a role in the Eucharistic rite like that of male
Deacons. Canon 19 of the First Council of Nicea seems to imply that
women Deacons are not ordained, but are lay people. By Chalcedon the
situation seems to have changed, and the extant rite reflects this
development.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

[The ordination takes place at the same point of the Liturgy as that for
male Deacons and the principal role of the diaconate as the minister of
the Chalice is stressed by the giving of the Chalice to the newly
ordained woman Deacon. This clearly indicates that the newly ordained
was admitted to the Sanctuary and stood near the Altar. The 14th century
canonist Matthew Blastares notes that, Â’except for a few things, the
ordination of women deacons is to be performed like that for male
deaconsÂ’. He notes particularly that Â‘she is brought to the Holy
TableÂ’. The rubrical details in the[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}older
books are few and the actual formula of ordination is not given in full.
As a result we do not know how the candidate was described or what her
ecclesiastical status was before ordination. I do not think the fact
that she only bows and does not kneel has any theological
significance.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

[Proclaiming the Gospel is primarily the task of the Bishop, who is
ordained before the Gospel. The Deacon is the most junior minister who
is permitted to read the Gospel in the Christian
Assembly.]{style="FONT-SIZE: 14pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
