\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](jo-hym.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for the Assumption](asccan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan2.md) \] \[ Paralysed Man \]
\[ [Samaritan Woman](SamarCan.md) \] \[ [Blind Man](BlindCanon.md) \]
\[ [Akathist](akathist.md) \] \[ [Holy Cross](1augcan1.md) \]

# CANON FOR THE PARALYSED MAN

****

Acrostic in the 9th Ode:  

Joseph ****

Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki.  
Ode 1. The Irmos. Tone 3.

O God, you are glorious in your wonders; you do marvels; you turned the
deep into dry land, covered chariots and saved a people who sing to you,
as God our redeemer.

****

Troparia.

O only King, who perform signs and do marvels, as merciful you willingly
underwent the Cross; having put death to death by death, you gave us
life.

At Christ’s Rising let us dance with faith today, O peoples: Hell has
been despoiled; rapidly he gave up the prisoners he held, as they
praised the wonderful works of God.

Christ, who with divine power once braced the limbs of the paralytic by
your word, and ordered him who had been weak for many years to take up
his bed, heal my fearsomely sick soul.

Once the Angel would come down into the Sheep Pool and cure one person
each year; but now by divine Baptism Christ cleanses unnumbered
multitudes.

Prince of Angels, Chief Captain of the ministers on high, protect, and
guard those who have come together in your venerable temple and who sing
God’s praises.

Glory.

With the Bodiless ones let us ceaselessly sing the praise of God without
beginning in three persons but one nature, Father, Word, Spirit, with
kingship and might undivided.

Both now.

**Theotokion***.*

O holy one, ever save this your city, which honours you, from dangers,
capture by aliens, civil war, the sword and every other threat.

****

Ode 3. The Irmos.

Barren and sterile soul, acquire fruit of good renown, and blessed with
offspring cry out: My heart is established. None is holy; none is just
but you, O Lord.

****

Troparia.

The sun of old seeing you hanging upon the tree, O Word, withdrew its
light, the whole earth was shaken; when you died the dead arose, O
all-powerful.

When you came with your soul to the belly of the earth, Hell speedily
gave up the souls he had acquired, which loudly sang a song of thanks to
your might, O only Lord.

O supremely Good, heal my soul which for many many years has been
grievously sick; that I may tread the paths which you have marked out
for those who love you.

With the ranks on high make intercession for those who sing your praise
with faith, Archangel of God, guarding and protecting us who fall into
the snares of life’s passions.

Glory.

Glory let us cry aloud to Father, Son and Spirit: for God is one by
nature, whom all the powers of heaven glorify in fear, crying: Holy,
Holy, Holy\!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Your conceiving was without seed, your child-bearing beyond
understanding, O immaculate Virgin-Mother; an awesome thing, greatest
marvel, feared by Angels, glorified by mortals, O Maiden, Sovereign Lady
.

****

Ode 4. The Irmos.

In the shadowed mountain Avvakum foresaw your immaculate womb, O Pure
one, therefore he raised the cry: God will come from Theman and the Holy
One from a shadowed, wooded mountain.

****

Troparia.

Consumed by envy the Hebrew people crucified you on a tree, O Lord; and
having annulled the sentence of death, you rose from the dead as mighty,
raising the world with you.

‘Why, O women, do you seek the inexhaustible Sweetness with sweet
spices? He has risen’, said the one who was seated clothed in white to
the Myrrhbearers, ‘and fills the whole world with fragrance’.

Bearing the image of a servant in your surpassing compassion, O Word,
you passed by on your way and restored health to the man who had lain
sick for many years, and ordered him to take up his bed.

An Angel of the Lord went down at from time to time and stirred up the
water in the Sheep Pool, making one, and only one person well; but
Christ saves countless multitudes by divine Baptism.

Prince of the Angels, guide of the erring, God’s Chief Captain, be among
us at this hour, and offer all our prayers to the only Maker and Master.

Glory.

The holy Trinity is united in nature, divided in persons: the Father
beyond all being, and the co-eternal Son and the Holy and alone
all-powerful Spirit.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

How did you give suck, O pure one? How give birth to an infant more
ancient than Adam? How bear in your embrace as Son him who is borne on
the shoulders of the Cherubim? As he understands, as he knows, he who
gave all things being.

****

Ode 5. The Irmos.

Shed on my humble soul, O Christ, the rays of your light which knows no
evening, and guide me to the fear of you; for your commands are light.

****

Troparia.

You were lifted up on the tree of the Cross and you lifted up the whole
world with you; and among the dead as God you raise those who have been
dead since time began.

Christ has risen as he said, having emptied the palaces of Hell, and he
appears to the Apostles, giving them a share in the joy that lasts
forever.

A snow-white, dazzling Angel appeared to the women saying, ‘Do not weep.
Our Life has arisen, having given life to the dead in the graves’.

As you raised the Paralysed Man, O Christ, heal my soul crippled by
transgressions, and lead me aright to walk in your straight paths.

Michael, Prince of Angels, save the people which throngs your temple
to-day and proclaims the wonderful works of God.

Glory.

Equal in honour, triple Unity, separated faithfully in persons but
united in nature, are Father, Son and the divine Spirit.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We praise your child-bearing without seed and your birth-giving beyond
understanding, O Pure one, calling you blessed as Mother of the Maker of
all things and Master.

****

The Irmos.

The deep of the passions has risen up against me, and a tempest of
contrary winds; but come quickly, my Saviour, save me and deliver me
from corruption, as you saved the Prophet from the beast.

****

Troparia.

Willingly you were raised on a tree, you were placed as a dead man in a
tomb, and having given life to all the dead in Hell together, you rose,
O Christ, by divine power.

Hell meeting you below was embittered, Merciful one, and hastily gave
back his prisoners, as they hymned your dread Resurrection, Saviour,
with never silent voices.

The divine Disciples, when they saw the life of all come from the grave,
with great desire, right judgement and gladness of soul worshipped the
risen Christ.

He who of old had lain for many years on a bed of pain, at your order,
was made whole, O Christ Giver of life and with hymns he glorified your
compassion.

Michael, Prince of Angels, who stand by the throne of the Master, be
present among us now and guide us who have gained you as a fervent
protector towards paths of life.

Glory.

With the dread armies above, I reverence you, Trinity in persons; I
proclaim you, Unity in Being, O Father without beginning, Son, right
Spirit, God of all.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

He who upholds all things by his divine command, Virgin Mother of God,
is held in your arms. He snatches us all from the enslaving hand of the
foe, for he is compassionate.

****

Ode 7. The Irmos.

You made the flame of the furnace like dew, and you saved the children
unburned; blessed are you O Lord, the God of our fathers.

****

Troparia.

When it saw you stretched upon the Tree, the sun withdrew its light,
unable to shine for the world when you, O King of all, had set by your
own will, to give light to all nations.

You arose, having emptied the graves and despoiled Hell by your almighty
power; therefore, O Christ, we praise your holy and divine Rising.

‘Why do you seek the living as one dead? He has risen. He is not in the
tomb’ the divine Angel, in appearance like flashing lightning, cried to
the Myrrhbearers.

With a word you healed the Paralysed Man, who had lain sick for many
years, and you cried to him: Take up your bed, and go, praising the
wonderful works of God.

Michael, Chief Captain of the Lord, guide those who in faith have
crowded into your divine temple to praise God; protect them by your
mediation from every kind of danger.

Glory.

O Trinity, save from every kind of danger those who in faith hymn you as
God of all and Master, and make them sharers in your good things.

******

Both now. Theotokion.

You remained Virgin when above reason you bore without change him who
was born of the Father without beginning before all ages; therefore,
Pure Virgin, we call you blessed.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

The God who is glorified unceasingly in the highest by Angels, you
heaven of heavens, earth, mountains, hills and deeps and all the human
race, bless him in hymns as Creator and Redeemer.

****

Troparia.

The veil was rent when you were crucified, our Saviour, and death gave
up the dead whom it had swallowed. Hell was stripped bare when it saw
you in the lowest regions of the earth.

Where, death, is your sting? Where, grave, is now your victory? You have
been slain and destroyed by the risen King. You reign no longer. The
Mighty One has taken away those whom you held prisoner.

‘Run quickly, announce the Resurrection to the Apostles’, cried the
shining young man to the Myrrhbearers, ‘The Master has risen, and with
him wondrously the dead from time’s beginning’.

The Paralysed Man, who had lain for many years, cried: Have mercy on me,
afflicted by distress, O Redeemer’. But he orders him to take up his bed
with haste and to walk upright.

Chief Captain, as leader of the immaterial Powers, with them ask for us
redemption from faults, correction of life and enjoyment of the eternal
good things of heaven.

Glory.

Let us praise in concert the uncreated, indivisible Essence, the
three-personned Godhead, Father without beginning, and Son and Holy
Spirit, crying with the Seraphim the dread melody.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Of old Isaias saw you as a book, Ever-Virgin, in which the timeless Word
had been inscribed by the Father’s finger, saving from all unreason us,
who sing your praise you with sacred words.

****

Ode 9. The Irmos.

In the bush on Mount Sinai Moses saw you, who received in your womb
unburned the fire of the Godhead; Daniel saw you as an unhewn mountain;
Isaias cried of a stem that had blossomed from the root of Jesse.

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif)esu, lifted up upon the Tree,
you lifted us up with you. Laid willingly in a tomb, you raised from the
graves all the dead, who praise your incomprehensible might and your
invincible power.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif) Word most fair, you dawned
most fair from the grave like a bridegroom from his chamber. You
abolished the gloom of Hell, and delivered the prisoners, who sang in
concert: Glory to your glory\! Glory, Jesu our God, to your Rising\!

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif)wiftly the women came to the
all-holy grave, bringing sighs and tears with sweet spices, and with
faith they were taught Christ’s Rising, which we celebrate, as we
rejoice with gladness of soul.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)nergy of body followed your
order, O Christ, and the man who was once paralysed was seen going by in
haste, carrying the bed on which he had lain for many years, and
praising your great power.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)lead for enlightenment for
us, holy and great Chief Captain, who always stand in the great light,
and give peace to our life, forever shaken by the assaults of the
serpent and by life’s troubles.

Glory.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)oly, Holy, Holy, I cry with
the powers on high, as with all reverence I glorify you, light and
lights, life and lives, Father, Word and Holy Spirit, three-personned
Unity, inseparable might, unconfused Godhead.

Both now. **

**Theotokion.**

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)e came from your
light-bearing womb, Christ the great Sun, and enlightened the world with
his bright rays, O Immaculate, and removed the darkness of the
transgression; therefore we sing your praise as cause of all good, O
bride of God.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

