\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](ParalSun.md) \]
\[ [Vespers](ParVesp.md) \] \[ Matins \]

AT MATINS
=========

**After the 1st Psalter reading, Kathismata of the Resurrection.**

Tone 3.

Christ has risen from the dead, the first fruit of those who sleep; the
first born of creation, and creator of all that has come into being; he
has renewed in himself the nature of our race that had perished. Death,
you no longer lord it, because the Master of all has abolished your
might.

Glory.

Having tasted death in the flesh, Lord, you cut out the bitterness of
death by your Rising, and you strengthened mankind against it, revoking
the defeat of the ancient curse. O Protector of our life, Lord, glory to
you.

Both now.

**Theotokion. Model melody.**

Awed by the beauty of your virginity, and by the splendour of your
purity, Gabriel cried aloud to you, O Mother of God, ‘How can I praise
you as I should? By what name shall I address you? I am troubled and
amazed. Therefore as I was commanded I cry to you: Hail, full of grace!’

****

After the 2nd Psalter reading, Kathismata.

Tone 3. Awed by the beauty.

Having accepted all that is human, having made your own all that is
ours, you were well-pleased, my Maker, to be nailed on a cross; having
chosen to endure death as man, that you might redeem humanity from death
as God; therefore as Giver of life we cry out to you: Glory, O Christ,
to your compassion!

Glory.

All things in heaven rejoiced with longing, all those on earth stood
amazed with fear, when the immaculate voice came to you, O Mother of
God: for one festival shone on both, because he delivered the
First-formed from death: therefore with the Angel we cry out to you:
Hail, pure Virgin-mother!

****

After Psalm 118, the Evlogitaria.

Then the YpakoÃ¯. Tone 3.

Terrifying them by his appearance, calming them by his words, the
dazzling Angel said to the Myrrh-bearing women: ‘Why do you seek the
living in the grave? Know that the Changer of corruption is the
Unchangeable; say to God: How fearful are your works! For you have saved
the human race.’

****

Then the Anavathmi of the Tone. Antiphon 1.

You rescued from Babylon the captivity of Zion: snatch me too from the
passions into life, O Word.

Those who sow in the south with God-given tears will reap in joy
ever-living sheaves.

Glory. Both now.

From the Holy Spirit the giving of all good things shines out as from
the Father and the Son, in whom all things live and move.

****

Antiphon 2.

If the Lord does not build the house of the virtues, we labour in vain:
but when he protects the soul, no one sacks our city.

From the fruit of the womb the Saints are ever by the Spirit made sons
to you, O Christ, as to the Father.

Glory. Both now.

By the Holy Spirit are seen all holiness and wisdom, for he gives
existence to all creation. Let us worship him, for he is God, with the
Father and the Son.

****

Antiphon 3.

Those who fear the Lord are blessed, they walk in the paths of his
commandments: for they eat every fruit which has life.

Be glad, Chief Shepherd, seeing your offspring around your table:
bearing branches of good works.

Glory. Both now.

With the Holy Spirit is all the wealth of glory, from whom comes grace
and life to all creation: for he is hymned with the Father and the Word.

****

Prokeimenon.

Say among the nations that the Lord is king: he has made the world so
firm that it can never be moved.

****

Verse:

Sing to the Lord a new song: sing to the Lord all the earth. ****

Then

Let everything that has breath**, Resurrection Gospel 5.** Having seen
the Resurrection**. Psalm 50 etc. The Canons of Easter, with the Irmi,
and of the Mother of God to 8, and that of the Paralysed Man to 6.**

Easter Canon. Tone 1. Ode 1.\
Irmos.

The day of Resurrection, let us be radiant, O peoples: Pascha, the
Lord’s Pascha; for Christ God has brought us from death to life, and
from earth to heaven, as we sing the triumphal song.

Troparia.

Let us purify our senses, and we shall see Christ shining forth, in the
unapproachable light of the resurrection, and we shall clearly hear Him
saying ‘Rejoice!’, as we sing the triumphal song.

Let the heavens as is fitting rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let
the whole world, both seen and unseen, keep the feast: for Christ has
risen, our eternal joy.

****

Canon of the Mother of God. Tone 1.\
The Acrostic in the first Troparia:

Theophan**.\
Ode 1. The same Irmos.**

The boundary of death you forced open, all-pure Virgin, by bearing
Christ the eternal Life, who shone out to-day from the tomb, and
enlightened the world.

Having seen your Son and God risen from the dead, you rejoice with the
Apostles, O holy and full of grace, and as cause of the joy of all, O
all-pure Mother of God, you first received the greeting ‘Rejoice’.

****

Canon of the Paralysed Man. Tone 3.\
Whose Acrostic is in the 9th Ode:

Joseph**.\
Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki.\
Ode 1. The Irmos.**

\[O God, you are glorious in your wonders; you do marvels; you turned
the deep into earth, covered chariots and saved a people who sing to
you, as God our redeemer.\]

****

Troparia.

O only King, who perform signs and do marvels, as merciful you willingly
underwent the Cross; having put death to death by death, you have given
us life.

At Christ’s Rising let us dance with faith today, O peoples: Hell has
been despoiled; rapidly he gave up the prisoners he held, as they hymned
the wonderful works of God.

O Christ, who once with divine power braced the limbs of the paralytic
by your word and ordered him who had been weak for many years to take up
his bed, heal my fearsomely sick soul.

Once the Angel would come down into the Sheep Pool and cure one person
each year; but now by divine Baptism Christ cleanses unnumbered
multitudes.

Prince of Angels, Chief Captain of the ministers on high, protect, and
guard those who have come together in your venerable temple and who sing
God’s praises.

Glory.

With the Bodiless ones let us ceaselessly sing the praise of God without
beginning in three persons but one nature, Father, Word, Spirit, with
kingdom and might undivided.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O holy one, ever save this your city, which honours you, from dangers,
capture by aliens, civil war, the sword and every other threat.

****

Katavasia.

The day of Resurrection. ****

Ode 3. Irmos.

Come let us drink a new drink, not one marvellously brought forth from a
barren rock, but the Source of incorruption, which springs up from the
tomb of Christ, in whom we are established.

****

Troparia.

Now all things are filled with light, both heaven and earth and those
beneath the earth: so let all creation sing Christ’s rising, by which it
is established.

Yesterday I was buried with You O Christ, to-day I rise with You as You
arise: yesterday I was crucified with You, glorify me with You, Saviour,
in your Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

Holy one, to-day I return to life undefiled through the goodness of Him
who was born from you and whose brightness shines to the ends of the
earth.

Seeing the God, whom you conceived in the flesh, rising from the dead as
he said, O holy one, dance; and magnify him as God, O immaculate.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[Barren and sterile soul, acquire fruit of good renown, and blessed
with offspring cry out: my heart is established; none is holy; none is
just but you, O Lord.\]

****

Troparia.

The sun of old seeing you hanging upon the tree, O Word, withdrew its
light, the whole earth was shaken; when you died the dead arose, O
all-powerful.

When you came with your soul to the belly of the earth, Hell speedily
gave up the souls he had acquired, which loudly sang a song of thanks to
your might, O only Lord.

O most Good, heal my soul which for many many years has been grievously
sick; that I may tread the paths which you have marked out for those who
long for you.

With the ranks on high make intercession, O Archangel of God, for those
who hymn you in faith, guarding and protecting us who fall into the
snares of life’s passions.

Glory.

Glory let us cry aloud to Father, Son and Spirit: for God is one by
nature, whom all the powers of heaven glorify in fear, crying: Holy,
Holy, Holy!

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Your conceiving was without seed, your child-bearing beyond
understanding, O immaculate Virgin-mother; an awesome thing, greatest
marvel, feared by Angels, glorified by mortals, O Maiden, Sovereign Lady
.

****

Katavasia.

** Come let us drink. ****

Kathismata. Tone 3.

A word alone braced the limbs of the paralytic, when the universal word
of him who through compassion appeared on earth for our sakes was
uttered; and so too he walked on carrying his bed, although the Scribes
could not bear to see what had been done, held as they were by wicked
envy which paralyses souls.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. Model Melody.**

Awed by the beauty of your virginity, and by the splendour of your
purity, Gabriel cried aloud to you, O Mother of God: ‘How can I praise
you as I should? By what name shall I invoke you? I am troubled and
amazed. Therefore, as I was commanded, I cry to you: Hail, full of
grace!’

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

Let the Prophet Avvakum, inspired by God, keep the divine watch with us,
and show forth the radiant Angel, who with resounding voice declares:
‘To-day brings salvation to the world, for Christ has risen as
omnipotent’.

****

Troparia.

Christ appeared as a male who opened a virgin womb: but as our food he
is called ‘lamb’: ‘unblemished’, as our Passover without stain: and
‘perfect’ for he is true God.

As a yearling lamb, for us the blessed crown, Christ was willingly
sacrificed for all, a cleansing Passover: and from the tomb the fair sun
of justice has shone for us again.

God’s forebear David dancing leaped before the Ark, mere shadow : but
seeing the fulfilment of the types, let us, God’s holy people, inspired,
rejoice, for Christ is risen as omnipotent.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

Even He who fashioned Adam your forefather, O holy one, is fashioned
from you, and by his own death He has destroyed Adam’s death to-day, and
shed light on all with the divine beams of his Resurrection.

Seeing Christ, whom your bore, shining in beauty from the dead, O Pure
one, fair and lovely and spotless among women, as you rejoice to-day
with the Apostles at the salvation of all, glorify him.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[In the shadowed mountain Avvakum foresaw your immaculate womb, O Pure
one, therefore he raised the cry: God will come from Theman and the Holy
One from a shadowed, wooded mountain.\]

****

Troparia.

Consumed by envy the Hebrew people crucified you on a tree, O Lord; and
having annulled the sentence of death, you rose from the dead as mighty,
raising the world with you.

‘Why, O women, do you seek the inexhaustible Sweetness with sweet
spices? he has risen’, the one who was seated clothed in white said to
the Myrrhbearers, ‘and fills the whole world with fragrance.

Bearing the image of a servant in your surpassing compassion, O Word,
you passed by on your way and restored health to the man who had lain
sick for many years, and ordered him to take up his bed.

An Angel of the Lord went down at a certain time and stirred up the
water in the Sheep Pool, making one, and only one person well; but
Christ saves countless multitudes by divine Baptism.

Prince of the Angels, guide of the erring, God’s Chief Captain, be among
us at this hour, and offer all our prayers to the only Maker and Master.

Glory.

The holy Trinity is united in nature, divided in persons: the Father
beyond all being, and the co-eternal Son and the Holy and alone
all-powerful Spirit.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

How did you give suck, O pure one? How give birth to an infant more
ancient than Adam? How bear in your embrace as Son him who is borne on
the shoulders of the Cherubim? As he understands, as he knows, he who
gave everything being.

****

Katavasia.

Let the Prophet. ****

Ode 5. Irmos.

Let us arise in the early dawn, and instead of myrrh, offer praises to
the Master; and we shall see Christ, the Sun of Justice, who causes life
to dawn for all.

****

Troparia.

Those who were held by Hades’ bonds, seeing your measureless compassion,
press forward to the light, O Christ, with joyful step, praising an
eternal Passover.

With torches in our hands let us go forth to meet Christ as he comes
from the grave, like a bridegroom, and with the festive ranks of Angels,
let us feast God’s saving Passover.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

O pure Mother of God, the assembly of the devout is enlightened by the
divine, lifegiving rays of the Resurrection of your Son, and is filled
with joy.

You did not open the gates of the Virgin, when You took flesh; You did
not break the seals of the grave, O King of creation. Therefore when she
saw You risen, she rejoiced.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[Shed on my humble soul, O Christ, the rays of your light which knows
no evening, and guide me to the fear of you; for your commands are
light.\]

****

Troparia.

You were lifted up on the tree of the Cross and you lifted up the whole
world with you; and among the dead as God you raise those who have been
dead since time began.

Christ has risen as he said, having emptied the palaces of Hell, and he
appears to the Apostles, giving them a share in the joy that lasts
forever.

A snow-white, dazzling Angel appeared to the women saying, ‘Do not weep.
Our life has arisen, having given life to the dead in the graves’.

As you raised the Paralysed Man, O Christ, heal my soul crippled by
transgressions, and lead me aright to walk in your straight paths.

Michael, Prince of Angels, save the people which throngs your temple
to-day and proclaims the wonderful works of God.

Glory.

Equal in honour, triple Unity, separated faithfully in persons but
united in nature, are Father, Son and the divine Spirit.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

We hymn your child-bearing without seed and your birth-giving beyond
understanding, O Pure one, calling you blessed as Mother of the Maker of
all things and Master.

****

Katavasia

*.* Let us arise at early dawn. ****

Ode 6. Irmos.

You went down to the deepest parts of the earth, and You shattered the
everlasting bars that held fast those that were fettered, O Christ. And
on the third day like Jonas from the whale, You arose from the tomb.

****

Troparia.

Keeping the seals intact O Christ, You rose from the tomb, You who did
not harm the locks of the Virgin’s womb at your birth, and You have
opened to us the gates of Paradise.

O my Saviour, the living, unslain Victim, as God offering yourself
willingly to the Father, You raised up with Yourself all Adam’s race, in
rising from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

Prisoner of old of death and corruption, the human race has been brought
back through Him was took flesh from your spotless womb to incorruptible
and everlasting life, O Virgin Mother of God.

He who went down, O Holy one, into your womb, dwelt there and took flesh
beyond understanding, went down into the lowest parts of the earth and
raised Adam with Himself when He rose from the tomb.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[The deep of the passions has risen up against me, and a tempest of
contrary winds; but come quickly, my Saviour, save me and deliver me
from corruption, as you saved the Prophet from the beast.\]

****

Troparia.

Willingly you were raised on a tree, you were placed as a dead man in a
tomb, and having given life to all the dead in Hell together, you rose,
O Christ, by divine power.

Hell meeting you below was embittered, Merciful one, and hastily gave
back his prisoners, as they hymned your dread Resurrection, Saviour,
with never silent voices.

The divine Disciples, when they saw the life of all come from the grave,
with great desire, right judgement and gladness of soul worshipped the
risen Christ.

he who of old had lain for many years on a bed of pain, at your order, O
Christ, was made whole, and with hymns glorified your compassion, O
Giver of life.

Michael, Prince of Angels, who stand by the throne of the Master, be
present among us now and guide us who have gained you as a fervent
protector towards paths of life.

Glory.

With the dread armies above, I reverence you, Trinity in persons; I
proclaim you, Unity in Being, O Father without beginning, Son, right
Spirit, God of all.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

He who bears all things by divine spirit is held, Virgin Mother of God,
in your arms. He snatches us all from the enslaving hand of the foe, for
he is compassionate.

****

Katavasia

*.* You went down to the deepest. ****

Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

By your divine presence, O Lord, raise my soul, grievously paralysed by
sins of every kind and by unnatural deeds, as you also raised the
Paralysed Man of old, that saved I may cry to you: O merciful Christ,
glory to your might.

****

The Ikos.

You grasp the ends of the earth in the hollow of your hand, Jesu, God
without beginning with the Father, Master of all things with the Holy
Spirit; you appeared in flesh, healing diseases and banishing
sufferings, giving light to the blind, and with a divine word you raised
up the Paralysed Man, ordering him to walk quickly and to take up on his
shoulders the bed which had borne him; therefore with him we all sing
praises and cry out: O merciful Christ, glory to your might.

****

Synaxarion of the Menaion, then the following:

On the same day, the fourth Sunday from Easter, we remember the
Paralysed Man, and as is fitting we celebrate so great a wonder.

****

Verses.\

Strength to the paralysed, the word of Christ.\
And so this word was healing, this alone.

In your boundless mercy, Christ our God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

He who delivered the Children from the furnace, becoming man suffers as
a mortal, and through suffering he clothes the mortal with the glory of
incorruption: the only blessed and most glorious God of our fathers’.

****

Troparia.

The holy women hastened after You with sweet spices. Whom they sought
with tears as a mortal, they worshipped with joy as the living God, and
they proclaimed the mystic Passover, O Christ, to your disciples.

We feast death’s slaughter, the overthrow of Hell, the first fruits of a
new eternal life: and dancing we hymn the cause: the only blessed and
most glorious God of our fathers.

How truly holy and all-festive is this saving night, how full of light,
herald of the bright day of the resurrection, in which the timeless
Light shone bodily for all from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

Having slain death, your Son, O all-pure one, has to-day given to all
life that endures to ages of ages: the only blessed and highly exalted
God of our fathers.

he who reigns over all creation becoming man dwelt in your womb, O full
of God’s grace, and having endured the cross and death he has risen as
God and raised us with him, for he is all powerful.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[You made the flame of the furnace like dew, and You saved the children
unburned; blessed are You O Lord, the God of our fathers.\]

****

Troparia.

When it saw you stretched upon the Tree the sun withdrew its light,
unable to shine on the world when you, O King of all, had willingly set
to give light to all nations.

You arose, having emptied the graves and despoiled Hell by your almighty
power; therefore, O Christ, we hymn your holy and divine Rising.

‘Why do you seek the living as one dead? he has risen. he is not in the
tomb’ the divine Angel, in appearance as flashing lightning, cried to
the Myrrhbearers.

With a word you healed the Paralysed Man, who had lain sick for many
years, and you cried to him: Take up your bed, and go, praising the
wonderful works of God.

Michael, Chief Captain of the Lord, guide those who in faith have
crowded into your divine temple to praise God; protect them by your
mediation from every kind of danger.

Glory.

O Trinity, save from every kind of danger those who in faith hymn you as
God of all and Master, and make them sharers in your good things.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

You remained Virgin when above reason you bore without change him who
was born of the Father without beginning before all ages; therefore,
Pure one, we call you blest.

****

Katavasia.

** He who delivered the Children. ****

Ode 8. Irmos.

This chosen and holy day is the first of Sabbaths, the Queen and Lady,
the Feast of Feasts and the Festival of Festivals on which we bless
Christ to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

Come let us share in the new fruit of the vine, of joy divine, and in
the kingdom of Christ, on the glorious day of the Resurrection, hymning
Him as God to all the ages.

Lift your eyes around you, O Zion, and see: for behold like beacons
shedding light divine your children have come to you, from West and
North, from the Sea and from the East, blessing Christ in you to all the
ages.

Almighty Father, Word and Spirit, nature united in three Persons, beyond
all being and beyond all Godhead, into You we have been baptised and we
bless to all the ages.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

As the creator came into the world through you, O Virgin Mother of God,
He tore open the womb of Hell and gave us mortals the Resurrection;
therefore we bless Him to the ages.

Your Son, O Virgin, having overthrown the might of death, in his
resurrection, as a mighty God, has exalted us with himself and deified
us; therefore we praise him to the ages.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[The God who is glorified unceasingly in the highest by Angels, O
heaven of heavens, earth, mountains, hills and deeps and all the human
race, bless him in hymns as Creator and Redeemer.\]

****

Troparia.

The veil was rent when you were crucified, O our Saviour, and death gave
up the dead whom it had swallowed; and Hell was stripped bare when it
saw you in the lowest regions of the earth.

Where death is your sting? Where grave is now your victory? You have
been slain and destroyed by the risen King; you reign no longer; the
Mighty One has taken away those whom you held prisoner.

‘Run quickly, announce the Resurrection to the Apostles’, cried the
shining young man to the Myrrhbearers, ‘The Master has risen, and with
him wondrously the dead from time’s beginning’.

The Paralysed Man, who had lain for many years, cried: Have mercy on me,
afflicted by distress, O Redeemer. But he orders him to take up his bed
with haste and to walk upright.

O Chief Captain, as leader of the immaterial Powers, with them ask for
us redemption from faults, correction of life and enjoyment of the
eternal good things of heaven.

Glory.

Let us hymn in consort the uncreated, indivisible Essence, the
three-personned Godhead, Father without beginning, and Son and Holy
Spirit, crying with the Seraphim the dread melody.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Of old Isaias saw you as a book, Ever-virgin, in which the timeless Word
had been inscribed by the Father’s finger, saving us from all unreason,
who hymn you with sacred words.

****

Katavasia.

This chosen. ****

Ode 9. Irmos.

Megalynarion:

** Magnify, O my soul, Him who suffered willingly, and was buried, and
arose from the grave on the third day.

‘Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and you too rejoice, O pure Mother
of God, at the arising of Him to whom you gave birth’.

****

Megalynarion:

** Magnify, O my soul, Christ the Giver of life, who arose from the
grave on the third day.

‘Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you; dance now and be glad, O Zion, and you too rejoice, O pure Mother
of God, at the arising of Him to whom you gave birth’.

****

Megalynarion:

** Christ is the new Passover, the living sacrificial victim, the Lamb
of God, who takes away the sin of the world.

O your divine and beloved and sweetest voice; You have truly promised
that you will be with us unto the end of the world, O Christ; and we
faithful rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion

*:* To-day the whole creation is glad and rejoices, for Christ has risen
and Hell has been despoiled.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ; O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of You fully in the unwaning day of your
Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

Now in harmony, O Virgin, we faithful call you blessed: Hail gate of the
Lord: Hail living city: Hail through whom to-day the light of the
Resurrection from the dead of Him who was born from you has shone for
us.

Rejoice, be glad, divine gate of the light; for Jesus, who set in the
tomb, has dawned shining more brightly than the sun, and shedding his
rays on all the faithful, O Sovereign Lady full of God’s grace.

****

Of the Paralysed Man. The Irmos.

\[In the bush on Mount Sinai Moses saw you, who received in your womb
unburned the fire of the Godhead; Daniel saw you as an unhewn mountain;
Isaias cried of a stem that had blossomed from the root of Jesse.\]

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif){width="27" height="49"}esu,
lifted up upon the tree, you lifted us up with you; and placed willingly
in a tomb, you raised from the graves all the dead, who praise your
incomprehensible might and your invincible power.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif){width="43" height="42"}
Word most fair, you dawned most fair from the grave as a bridegroom from
his chamber; you abolished the gloom of Hell, and delivered the
prisoners, who sang in consort: Glory to your glory! Glory, Jesu our
God, to your Rising!

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif){width="28"
height="44"}wiftly the women came to the all-holy grave bringing sighs
and tears with sweet spices, and they were taught in faith Christ’s
Rising, which we celebrate, rejoicing in gladness of soul.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif){width="32"
height="47"}nergy of body followed your order, O Christ, and the man
formerly Paralysed was seen going by in haste, bearing the bed on which
he had lain for many years, and praising your great power.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif){width="33" height="55"}lead
for enlightenment for us, great Chief Captain, who always stand in the
great light, and give peace to our life forever shaken by the assaults
of the serpent and by life’s difficulties, O holy one.

Glory.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif){width="38" height="45"}oly,
Holy, Holy, I cry with the powers above, as with all reverence I glorify
you, light and lights, life and lives, Father, Word and Holy Spirit,
three-personned Unity, inseparable might, unconfused Godhead.

Both now. **

**Theotokion.**

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif){width="38" height="45"}e
came from your light-bearing womb, Christ the great Sun, and enlightened
the world, O immaculate, with his bright rays, and he removed the
darkness of the transgression; therefore we hymn you as cause of all
good, O bride of God.

****

Katavasia.

** Shine, shine.

Holy is the Lord our God

**(Â´ 3).**

Exapostilarion of Easter.

Having fallen asleep in the flesh as a mortal, O King and Lord, you rose
again on the third day, raising up Adam from corruption, and abolishing
death. O Pascha of incorruption, O salvation of the world.

****

Another of the Paralysed Man. Women hear.

The Lord who loves mankind and is full of pity came to the Sheep Pool to
heal diseases; he found a man who had been lying there for many years
and cried out to him: Take your bed, go, towards the ways of justice.

****

At Lauds we insert 8 stichera, 4 of the Resurrection in Tone 3 and the 4
of Easter with their verses.

Come all you nations, know the power of the dread mystery; for Christ
our Saviour, the Word in the beginning, was crucified for us and
willingly buried and arose from the dead to save the world. Let us
worship him.

The guards related all the marvels, Lord; but the Sanhedrin of folly
filled their hands with bribes and thought to hide your Resurrection,
which the world glorifies. Have mercy on us.

All things are filled with joy, having received proof of the
Resurrection; for Mary Magdalen came to the tomb, found an angel,
dazzling in white, sitting on the stone, and he said: ‘Why do you seek
the living with the dead? he is not here, but he has risen as he said,
and goes ahead to Galilee.’

In your light, Master who love mankind, we shall see light; for you have
risen from the dead, giving life to the human race, that all creation
may glorify you, the only sinless one. Have mercy on us.

****

Tone 5.

Verse:

** Let God arise and let his enemies be scattered: and let those that
hate him flee before his face.

A sacred Pascha has been shown forth to us to-day, a new and holy
Pascha, a mystic Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha, a Pascha that is
Christ the Redeemer, a spotless Pascha, a great Pascha, a Pascha of the
faithful, a Pascha that has opened to us the gates of Paradise, a Pascha
that hallows all the faithful.

****

Verse:

As smoke vanishes, so let them vanish: as wax melts before the fire.

Come from the sight, O women bearers of good tidings, and say to Zion:
Receive from us the tidings of joy, of the Resurrection of Christ.
Exult, dance and be glad, O Jerusalem, for you have seen Christ the King
as a bridegroom come forth from the tomb.

****

Verse:

** So let sinners perish at the presence of God: and let the righteous
be glad.

The Myrrhbearing women at early dawn came near the tomb of the Giver of
life; they found an Angel sitting on the stone, and he, addressing them
in this manner, said: Why do you seek the living among the dead? Why do
you mourn the Incorruptible amid corruption? Go, proclaim it to his
Disciples.

****

Verse:

** This is the day that the Lord has made: let us be glad and rejoice in
it.

A Pascha of delight, Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha
has dawned for us, a Pascha on which let us embrace one another with
joy. O Pascha, ransom from sorrow! To-day Christ has shone forth from
the tomb as from a bridal chamber, and has filled the women with joy,
saying: Proclaim it to the Apostles.

Glory.

**Tone 8.**

O Lord, the pool did not cure the Paralysed Man, but your word renewed
him, nor did his sickness of so many years hinder it, for the force of
your voice was shown to be sharper; and he cast off the weight so hard
to carry and carried the burden of his bed as a witness to the multitude
of your mercies; glory to you.

Both now.

**Tone 5.**

It is the day of Resurrection; let us be radiant for the festival, and
let us embrace one another. Let us say, O brethren, even to those who
hate us: let us forgive all things at the Resurrection, and so let us
cry: Christ is risen from the dead; death he trampled down by death, and
to those in the tombs he has given life.

****

Great Doxology and Dismissal.

Before the 1st Hour the Eothinon. Tone 5.

How wise are your judgements, O Christ! How did you let Peter understand
your Resurrection from the grave clothes alone; but, as you walked with
Luke and Cleopas, talked with them, and as you talked did not at once
reveal yourself? And so you were reproached as being only a stranger in
Jerusalem and not one who had shared to the end in her counsels. But
disposing all things for the advantage of the creature you had
fashioned, you both unfolded the prophecies concerning yourself and in
the blessing of bread made yourself known to them, whose hearts before
this were on fire for knowledge of you, and who were already proclaiming
clearly to the assembled Disciples your Resurrection, through which have
mercy upon us.

\[

**Note the printed Pentecostaria wrongly give the Eothinon as number 3
for this Sunday**\]

NOTICE.

****

Note that the office of the Paralysed Man is sung for three days: on
Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
