\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](john-dam.md) \]
\[ [Antipascha](thomcan.md) \]
\[ [First Canon for the Assumption](asccan01.md) \]
\[ [Second Canon for Pentecost](pentcan2.md) \]
\[ [Prophet Elias](20julcan.md) \] \[ [Symeon Stylites](symeon.md) \]
\[ [Protomartyr Thekla](TheklaCan.md) \] \[ Pascha \]
\[ [Paschal Canon with Notes](paschal_canon_with_notes.md) \]

**CANON FOR PASCHA\
A Composition by Monk John**

****

Ode 1. 1st Tone. Irmos.

The day of Resurrection, let us be radiant, O peoples! Pascha, the
Lord’s Pascha; for Christ God has brought us from death to life, and
from earth to heaven, as we sing the triumphal song.

****

Troparia.

Let us purify our senses, and in the unapproachable light of the
resurrection we shall see Christ shining forth, and we shall clearly
hear him saying ‘Rejoice!’, as we sing the triumphal song.

Let the heavens, as is fitting, rejoice and let the earth be glad. Let
the whole world, both seen and unseen, keep the feast: for Christ has
risen, our eternal joy.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

Come let us drink a new drink, not one marvellously brought forth from a
barren rock, but a Source of incorruption, which pours out from the tomb
of Christ, in whom we are established.

****

Troparia.

Now all things have been filled with light, both heaven and earth and
those beneath the earth; so let all creation sing Christ’s rising, by
which it is established.

Yesterday I was buried with you O Christ, today I rise with you as you
arise. Yesterday I was crucified with you; glorify me with you, Saviour,
in your Kingdom.

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

Let the Prophet Avvakoum, inspired by God, keep the divine watch with
us, and show forth the radiant Angel, who with resounding voice
declares, ‘To-day is salvation for the world, for Christ has risen as
omnipotent’.

****

Troparia.

Christ appeared as a ‘male’ who opened the virgin womb. As our food he
is called ‘lamb’; ‘unblemished’, as our Passover without stain; and
‘perfect’, for he is true God.

As a yearling lamb, for us the blessed crown, Christ was willingly
sacrificed for all, a cleansing Passover. And from the tomb the fair Sun
of justice has shone for us again.

God’s forebear David, dancing, leaped before the Ark, mere shadow, but
seeing the fulfilment of the types, let us, God’s holy people, inspired,
rejoice, for Christ has risen as omnipotent.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

Let us arise in the early dawn, and instead of myrrh, offer praises to
the Master; and we shall see Christ, the Sun of Justice, who causes life
to dawn for all.

****

Troparia.

Those who were held by Hades’ bonds, seeing your measureless compassion,
press forward to the light, O Christ, with joyful steps, praising an
eternal Passover.

With torches in our hands let us go out to meet Christ as he comes from
the grave like a bridegroom, and with the festive ranks of Angels, let
us together feast God’s saving Passover.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

You went down to the deepest parts of the earth, and you shattered the
everlasting bars of those that those that were fettered, O Christ. And
on the third day, like Jonas from the whale, you arose from the tomb.

****

Troparia.

Keeping the seals intact, O Christ, you rose from the tomb, you who did
not harm the locks of the Virgin’s womb at your birth, and you have
opened to us the gates of Paradise.

O my Saviour, the living, unslain Victim, as God offering yourself
willingly to the Father, you raised with yourself all Adam’s race, in
rising from the tomb.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

He who delivered the Young Men from the furnace, becoming man suffers as
a mortal, and through suffering he clothes the mortal with the glory of
incorruption: the only blessed and most glorious God of our fathers.

****

Troparia.

The holy women hastened after you with sweet spices. The One whom they
sought with tears as a mortal, they worshipped with joy as the living
God, and they proclaimed the mystic Passover, O Christ, to your
disciples.

We feast death’s slaughter, the overthrow of Hell, the first fruits of a
new eternal life: and dancing we hymn the cause: the only blessed and
most glorious God of our fathers.

How truly holy and all-festive is this saving night, how full of light,
herald of the bright day of the resurrection, in which the timeless
Light shone bodily for all from the tomb.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

This chosen and holy day is the first of Sabbaths, the Queen and Lady,
the Feast of Feasts and the Festival of Festivals on which we bless
Christ to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

Come let us share in the new fruit of the vine, in divine joy, and in
the kingdom of Christ, on the glorious day of the Resurrection, as we
sing his praise as God to all the ages.

Lift your eyes around you, Sion, and see. For behold, like beacons
shedding light divine your children have come to you, from West and
North, from the Sea and from the East, blessing Christ in you to all the
ages.

Almighty Father, Word and Spirit, nature united in three Persons, beyond
all being and beyond all Godhead, into you we have been baptised and we
bless you to all the ages.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

Megalynarion:

Magnify, O my soul, him who suffered willingly, and was buried, and rose
from the grave on the third day.

Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you. Dance now and be glad, O Sion, and you too rejoice, pure Mother of
God, at the arising of him to whom you gave birth.

****

Megalynarion:

Magnify, O my soul, Christ the Giver of life, who arose from the grave
on the third day.

Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you. Dance now and be glad, O Sion, and you too rejoice, pure Mother of
God, at the arising of him to whom you gave birth.

****

Megalynarion:

Christ is the new Passover, the living sacrificial victim, the Lamb of
God, who takes away the sin of the world.

O divine! O beloved! O sweetest voice! You have truly promised that you
will be with us unto the end of time, O Christ. And we the faithful
rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion:

The Angel cried to her that is full of grace: Pure Virgin, rejoice! And
again I say: Rejoice! For your Son has risen from the tomb on the third
day.

O divine! O beloved! O sweetest voice! You have truly promised that you
will be with us unto the end of time, O Christ. And we the faithful
rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion:

Mary Magdalen ran to the tomb, and seeing Christ, questioned him as
though he were the gardener.

O divine! O beloved! O sweetest voice! You have truly promised that you
will be with us unto the end of time, O Christ. And we the faithful
rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion:

A dazzling Angel appeared to the women and cried: Cease your tears, for
Christ has risen.

O divine! O beloved! O sweetest voice! You have truly promised that you
will be with us unto the end of time, O Christ. And we the faithful
rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion:

** You awoke and wakened the dead from every age, as the Lion of Juda,
roaring like a king.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

****

Megalynarion:

Christ has risen, trampling on death and raising the dead. Rejoice all
you peoples.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

****

Megalynarion:

Today the whole creation rejoices and is glad, for Christ has risen and
Hell has been despoiled.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

****

Megalynarion

Today the Master despoiled Hell and raised the prisoners whom it had
held from the ages in harsh captivity.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

Glory to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy Spirit.

****

Megalynarion:

Magnify, O my soul, the might of the Godhead in three Persons yet
undivided.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

Both now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Megalynarion:

Rejoice, O Virgin, rejoice! Rejoice, Blessed One! Rejoice, Glorified
One. your Son has risen from his three days in the tomb.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ! O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God! Grant that we may partake of you fully in the day that has no
evening of your Kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
