\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](ordinations.md) \] \[ Presbyter \]
\[ [Deacon](deacon.md) \] \[ [Woman Deacon](woman_deacon.md) \]

# ORDER FOR THE ORDINATION OF A PRESBYTER

After the completion if the Cherubikon, the one who is to be ordained
Presbyter stands on the solea, two Deacons take the candidate on either
side* *\[to the middle of the church, with one hand on his neck and with
the other holding his hands; and they bow him as low as possible. One
Deacon says Give the order. They bring him forward and bow him down
again; and another Deacon says: ** Give the order.\] They bring him near
the Holy Doors and bow him low before the Bishop, who is seated on his
small throne in front of the Altar. The Archdeacon says: ** Give the
order, Holy Master. Then they let him go and two Presbyters, the first
and second in rank, come from the Sanctuary and take the one who is to
be ordained Presbyter, who is standing on the Solea, and bring him into
the Sanctuary, circling the Altar as they sing the following Troparia\[,
which are repeated by the Singers\]*:*

Tone 7.

Holy Martyrs, who fought the good fight and were crowned, intercede with
the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Glory to you, Christ God, boast of Apostles, joy of Martyrs, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

Tone 5.

Isaias dance: the Virgin was with child and gave birth to a Son,
Emmanuel, who is both God and man. Orient is his name, whom we magnify
as we call the Virgin blessed.

Note that when they sing the troparion Holy Martyrs the Bishop takes his
seat in front of the Holy Table on a small throne, and when, as they
circle the Holy Table, they come in front of the Bishop they make a
metania, and the one to be ordained kisses the Bishop’s knee above the
Omophorion \[Epigonation\].

Then the Bishop stands up and the one to be ordained approaches the
Bishop and is signed three times on the head. Then the ordinand leans
his forehead* *\[on his hands, which he has laid crossed and palms
downward\] ** on the Holy Table and kneels on both knees. When the
Deacon has exclaimed Let us attend, the Bishop, with his right hand
placed on the head of the ordinand, declaims:

Divine grace, which always heals what is infirm and completes what is
lacking, ordains N.*,* the most devout Deacon, as Presbyter. Let us
therefore pray for him, that the grace of the All-Holy Spirit may come
upon him.

And at once Lord, have mercy ** is chanted three times by those in the
Sanctuary ** \[by those on the right and three times by those on the
right\]and ** \[in the same way\] ** by those outside. The Bishop again
signs his head three times, and when the Deacon has said Let us pray to
the Lord, the Bishop, with his hand on the head of the ordinand prays as
follows in a low voice:**

O God, without beginning and without end, you are older than all
creation, and have honoured with the title of ‘Presbyter’ those who have
been found worthy of this rank to minister the word of your truth.
Master of all things, be well pleased for this man, who, because of his
unblemished way of life and unswerving faith, you have been well pleased
to be appointed through me, to receive this great grace of the Holy
Spirit. Show your servant to be perfect, by being well-pleasing to you
in all things, and living in a manner worthy of this great honour of the
Priesthood that has been given him by your providential power. Because
yours is the might, and yours is the Kingdom, and the power, and the
glory of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. Amen.

After this Prayer the First Priest says in a quiet voice, such that
those present can hear and respond, the following Diaconal Litany:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop N., for his Priesthood, for help, continuance, peace,
health, salvation and for the work of his hands, let us pray to the
Lord.

For the servant of God N., who is now appointed Presbyter, and for his
salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

That our God who loves humankind will grant that his Priesthood may be
without spot or blemish, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

For this city, for every city, town and village, and for the faithful
who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

While this is being said the Bishop, keeping his hand on the head of the
candidate, prays as follows in a low voice:

Lord God, great in power and unsearchable in understanding, wonderful in
counsel above all the children of humankind, fill with the gift of your
Holy Spirit this man, whom you have been well-pleased to let enter the
rank of Presbyter, that he may become worthy to stand without blemish
before your Altar, to proclaim the Gospel of your Kingdom, to minister
the word of your truth, to offer gifts and spiritual sacrifices, to
renew your People through the washing of rebirth, so that, when he meets
the second coming of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ, your
only-begotten Son, he may in your great goodness receive the reward of
his good stewardship of his own order. For blessed and glorified is your
all-honoured and majestic name, of the Father, the Son and the Holy
Spirit, now and forever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

And after the Amen ** he stands him up and brings the back of  the
Orarion of the newly ordained to the front over his right shoulder,
saying: Axios\! \[Then he vests him with the Belt, having told him to
bless it first, saying again, Axios\!\] Then he vests him in the
Phelonion in the same way, again proclaiming, Axios\! And those in the
Sanctuary, and the Singers chant the same.

The newly-ordained kisses the Bishop and the Presbyters and then goes
and takes his stand with the Presbyters, reading the Scroll.

The Deacon stands in his usual place and says,* *Let us complete our
prayer to the Lord.

When the Holy Gifts have been perfected and the Bishop is about to say,
So that those who partake, the newly ordained comes forward and the
Bishop gives him the Holy Bread \[on the Sponge\], saying to him,**

Take this gage, and guard it until the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when you are going to be asked for it back by him.

The newly ordained takes and goes to the place where he was standing
before, placing his hands on the Holy Table and saying to himself,*
*Lord, have mercy, and, ** Have mercy on me, O God \[Psalm 50\].

When the Bishop is about to say, The Holy Things for the holy, the newly
ordained gives back the Holy Bread and is the first to receive Communion
from the Bishop before all the rest. He also says the Prayer behind the
Ambo.

\[It is customary for the newly ordained to be asked by the Bishop to
distribute the Antidoron\]

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

