\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](eucholog.md) \]
\[ [Baptism](baptism.md) \] \[ [Marriage Rites](marriage.md) \]
\[ [Anointing of the Sick](anointin.md) \]
\[ [Funeral Service](funeral.md) \]
\[ [Consecration of a Church](dedic-int.md) \]
\[ [Liturgy of Saint James](lit-james.md) \]
\[ [Proskomidi](proskomidi.md) \]
\[ [Canon for Confession](canon_for_confession.md) \]
\[ Presanctified \] \[ [Ordinations](ordinations.md) \]

INTRODUCTION

This provisional translation of the Liturgy of the Presanctified is
intended to be practical, rather than critical. It is based for the most
part on the 3rd volume of the *Hieratikon* published by the Monastery of
Simonos Petra in 1992, together with second edition of the Greek text
published by Professor Phountoulis in 1986 and the 3rd edition of
*Megali Tessarakosti* by the *Apostoliki Diakonia* in 1991. The earlier
edition by Rigopoulis 1977 and the Slavonic  *Sluzebnik*, Moscow 1996.
There are many variations in the various editions and I hope to provide
more detailed annotation shortly, together with translations of St
Theodore the Studite’s *Commentary* and St Symeon of ThessalonikaÂ‘s
*Answers.* The ReaderÂ‘s and SingersÂ‘ parts of the service will be
found elsewhere on these pages, [The Holy and Divine Liturgy of the
Presanctified Gifts](lenten_vespers_2.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE DIVINE LITURGY OF THE PRESANCTIFIED

****

When the moment for the service arrives, after the ekphonesis

For yours is the kingdomÂ… ** **by the Priest at the beginning of the
9th Hour, the Deacon joins the Priest and they go and make a metania to
the Superior, or to his stall. Then, going to the middle of the church,
they make three bows, saying,**

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us.

****

Then, having kissed the holy icons of Christ and the Mother of God, and
having asked pardon of the people, the enter the sanctuary, making three
bows before the holy Table, saying nothing.

The Priest takes his priestly vestments and puts them on, saying
nothing, or only

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us. Amen. **It is customary not to wear marks of honour, such
as pectoral crosses and epigonatia. The Priest blesses the DeaconÂ’s
vestments simply with his right hand, likewise saying nothing.**

After they have vested they take their stand before the holy Table and
make three metanias, saying,

** O God be merciful to me, a sinner. **The Priest, having kissed the
holy Gospel and made the sign of the Cross on the DeaconÂ’s head, gives
the Dismissal of the 9th Hour.**

Then the Deacon begins:

Master, give the blessing.

****

The Priest, making the sign of the Cross with the holy Gospel, gives the
blessing:

Blessed is the Kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, now and always, and to ages of ages.

****

While the Opening Psalm is recited by the Superior, or Reader, the
Priest, standing in front of the holy Table, reads the first four
prayers for the Lighting of the Lamps, if there is no Deacon, without
their ekphoneses.

When the Opening Psalm is completed the Deacon, outside the Holy Doors,
says the:

**Litany of Peace**

****

Deacon:

In peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And so after each petition.**

Deacon:

For the peace from on high and for the salvation of our souls, let us
pray to the Lord.

For the peace of the whole world, for the welfare of the holy Churches
of God, and for the union of all, let us pray to the Lord.

For this holy house, and for those who enter it with faith, reverence
and the fear of God, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Archbishop

**N.**, for the honoured order of presbyters, for the diaconate in
Christ, for all the clergy and the people, let us pray to the Lord.

For our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Royal Family, her
Government, and all in authority, let us pray to the Lord.

\[For our father and superior, Priest-monk

**N.**, and all our brotherhood in Christ, let us pray to the Lord.\]

For this city, for every city, monastery, town and village, and for the
faithful who dwell in them, let us pray to the Lord.

For favourable weather, an abundance of the fruits of the earth, and
temperate seasons, let us pray to the Lord.

For those who travel by land, air or water, for the sick, the suffering,
for those in captivity, and for their safety and salvation, let us pray
to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.

Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother
of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God.

****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

While the Deacon is chanting the Litany of Peace, the Priest, in a low
voice, says the

**1st Prayer at the Lighting of the Lamps**

****

O **** Lord, compassionate and merciful, long-suffering and full of
mercy, listen to our prayer and attend to the voice of our supplication.
Make for us a sign for good. Guide us in your way, to walk in your
truth. Make glad our hearts to fear your holy Name, because you are
great and do wondrous things. You alone are God, and there is none like
you, O Lord, among gods: powerful in mercy and loving in strength to
help and to console and to save all who hope in your holy Name.

****

Priest, aloud:

** For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

The 18th Kathisma of the Psalter is recited in three sections. While
this is being read, the Priest, uncovered, and with the curtain of the
Holy Doors shut, goes to the Prothesis and, having washed his hands,
takes the Paten, Star and Veil and carries them to the holy Table. Then
he places the holy Gospel to the right of the holy Table, unfolds the
Antimension and places the Paten on it. He takes one of the
Presanctified Breads and places it on the Paten with great attentiveness
and devotion. He puts the Star in place and covers it with the Veil,
saying nothing, or only **

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us. **Taking the censer he censes the holy Gifts three times
and makes three full prostrations. After this he takes up the Holy Gifts
and, circling the holy Table anti-clockwise, he goes to the Prothesis,
the Deacon going ahead with a lamp and censing as he goes. The Priest
lays the Holy Gifts on the Prothesis. Then he pours wine and water into
the Chalice, cover it with the veil, and both Chalice and Paten with the
Aer, saying none of the usual prayers of the Prothesis, nor the Prayer
of Offering, or only** ** Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord
Jesus Christ our God, have mercy on us, **for the sacrifice is already
sanctified and perfected. Then he, having again censed the Holy Gifts
three times, he goes and censes the holy Table and whole sanctuary. Then
he folds up the Antimension and lays the holy Gospel on it.**

After the last

** Both now and for ever ** **of the 1st section of the Psalter:**

Deacon:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

** Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People*:*

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed and
glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints,
let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest in a low voice says the

**\
2nd Prayer at the Lighting of the Lamps**

Lord, do not rebuke us in your anger, nor chastise us in your wrath, but
deal with us in accordance with your kindness, physician and healer of
our souls. Guide us to the harbour of your will. Enlighten the eyes of
our hearts to the knowledge of your truth and grant that the rest of the
present day and the whole time of our life may be peaceful and without
sin, at the prayers of the holy Mother of God and of all the Saints.

****

Priest, aloud:

** For yours is the Might, and yours is the Kingdom, the Power and the
Glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and always and to
ages of ages. ****

People**:**

Amen. ****

After the 2nd Section of the Kathisma.

Deacon:

** Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

** Lord, have mercy. . ****

Deacon:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Calling to remembrance our most holy, most pure, most blessed and
glorious Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints,
let us entrust ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ
our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest in a low voice says the

**\
3rd Prayer at the Lighting of the Lamps**

Lord our God, remember us, sinners and your unprofitable servants, as we
call upon your holy Name, and do not put us to shame from the
expectation of your mercy, but graciously grant us, Lord, all the
requests that are for salvation, and count us worthy to love and to fear
you from our whole heart, and in all things to do your will.

****

Priest,

**aloud: For yours is the Might, and yours is the Kingdom, the Power and
the Glory, of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and always
and to ages of ages.** ****

People**:**

Amen. ****

After the 3rd Section of the Kathisma.

Deacon:

Again and again in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by your grace.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Commemorating our all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady,
Mother of God and Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust
ourselves and one another and our whole life to Christ our God. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

The Priest in a low voice says the

**\
4th Prayer at the Lighting of the Lamps**

O Lord, who are praised by the holy Powers with never silent hymns and
unceasing songs of glory, fill our mouth with your praise to give
majesty to your holy Name, and give us a part and an inheritance with
all who fear you in truth and who keep your commandments, at the prayers
of the holy Mother of God and of all your Saints.

****

Priest:

** For you are our God, a God of mercy and salvation, and to you we give
glory, to the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. ****

People**:**

Amen. ****

The Curtain of the Holy Doors is opened.

At

** Lord, I have cried **the Priest blesses the incense as usual and
then, if there is no Deacon, censes first the Prothesis, where the Holy
Bread lies, then the holy Table, the Sanctuary and the whole Church.**

During the Theotokion, the Entrance with the censer. When a Gospel is to
be read, the Entrance is made with it. Standing in the usual place, the
Deacon says:

Let us pray to the Lord.

****

The priest says the Prayer of the Entrance in a low voice.

**Prayer of the Entrance**

At evening, at morning and at midday we praise, bless and give thanks,
and we pray to you, Master of all things, Lord who love mankind: Direct
our prayer before you like incense, and do not incline our hearts to
words or thoughts of evil, but deliver us from all that hunt down our
souls. For our eyes look to you, O Lord, our Lord, and we have hoped in
you.

For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, to the Father, the Son
and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Deacon:

Master, bless the holy entrance. ****

The Priest, blessing towards the east, says:

Blessed be the entrance of your holy ones, always, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages.

****

Deacon:

Amen. ****

He censes the holy icons and the People and waits for the end of the
troparion. When it is finished, he raises the censer, making the sign of
the Cross, and exclaims:

Wisdom. Stand upright.

****

Then we sing

**\
Thanksgiving at the Lighting of the Lamps\
An ancient poem, or, as some say, by the martyr Athenogenes.**

O joyful light of the holy glory of the immortal, heavenly, holy,
blessed Father, O Jesus Christ. Now that we have come to the setting of
the sun and see the evening light, we sing the praise of God, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit. It is right at all times to hymn you with holy
voices, Son of God, giver of life. Therefore the world glorifies you.

\[

**Deacon: (facing the People):** Let us attend. ****

Priest:

** Peace to all. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Priest:

** Wisdom!\] ****

Deacon:

** Evening ****

Reader:

Prokeimenon. Tone Â… Psalm Â… \[**from the Triodion, followed by the
Readings\]**

Deacon:

** Wisdom! ****

Reader:

The reading is from Genesis \[**or** ** Exodus\].

Deacon: Let us attend.

****

After the reading:

Priest:

** Wisdom! ****

Reader:

** Prokeimenon. Tone Â… PsalmÂ… ****

After the Prokeimenon the Reader says in a loud voice:

** Command! **The Priest, holding a lighted candle with the censer in
his right hand, stands facing the holy Table and making the sign of the
Cross with the light, says:**

Priest:

Wisdom! Stand upright! ****

Then he turns and makes the sign of the Cross with the light over the
people, saying:

The Light of Christ shines for all!

****

Deacon:

** Wisdom. ****

Reader:

The reading is from Proverbs \[**or** ** Job\] ****

Deacon:

Let us attend. ****

At the end of the Reading the Priest says:

Peace to you. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

And at once the Priest, censing the holy Table, begins:

Let my prayer be directed like incense before you; the lifting up of my
hands be an evening sacrifice.

****

Then, as the Choirs take this up four times alternately, the Priest
censes each side of the holy Table, declaiming the verses, which in
monasteries are declaimed by the Reader.

1.

**People:** Let my prayer be directed like incense before you; the
lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. ****

Priest/Reader:

** Lord, I have cried to you, hear me; give heed to the voice of my
supplication when I cry to you.

2.

**People:** Let my prayer be directed like incense before you; the
lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. ****

Priest/Reader:

Set a guard, O Lord, on my mouth; and a strong door about my lips.

3.

**People:** Let my prayer be directed like incense before you; the
lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. ****

Priest/Reader:

** Let not my heart incline to evil words; to make excuses for my sins.
\[Glory. Both now. **is often added, erroneously***.*\]

4.

**People:** Let my prayer be directed like incense before you; the
lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice. ****

The Priest, returning to the front of the holy Table, takes up again:

Let my prayer be directed like incense before you Â…

****

He goes out through the Holy Doors and censes the Icons and the People
as the Choir completes the chant:

The lifting up of my hands be an evening sacrifice.

****

Then the

Prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian**, once.**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

If there is a Â‘feastedÂ’ Saint, the Apostle and Gospel of the Feast (in
Holy Week only the Gospel) are now read according the following order,

After the final

Let my prayer be directed, **the Deacon, or in his absence the Priest,
facing the people, says:**

Let us attend.

****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

Wisdom. ****

The Reader reads the verses of the Prokeimenon.

Deacon:

Wisdom. ****

The Reader reads the title of the Apostle.

Deacon:

Let us attend. ****

The Reader reads the Apostle, and when he has finished the Priest says:

Peace to you. ****

Reader:

And to your spirit. Alleluia. (**Three times**)*.* ****

While the

** Alleluia **is being sung the Deacon, taking the censer with incense,
approaches the Priest, and having received a blessing for the incense he
censes the book of the Gospel, the Holy Table all round, the whole
sanctuary, the Priest and, coming out a little from the Holy Doors, the
principal icons and the People.**

The Priest, in a low voice, reads the

**Prayer of The Gospel**

Master, Lover of mankind, make the pure light of your divine knowledge
shine in our hearts and open the eyes of our mind to understand the
message of your Gospel. Implant in us the fear of your blessed
commandments, so that, having trampled down all carnal desires, we may
change to a spiritual way of life, thinking and doing all things that
are pleasing to you. For you are the illumination of our souls and
bodies, Christ God, and to you we give glory, together with your Father
who is without beginning, and your all-holy, good and life-giving
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

When he has finished censing, the Deacon puts away the censer. He
approaches the Priest, and, holding his Orarion with the tips of his
fingers,

** **points to the Holy Gospel as it lies on the Holy Table, bows his
head and says in a low voice:**

Master, bless the herald of the Good Tidings of the Holy Apostle and
Evangelist

**N.**

The Priest blesses him, saying:

May God, through the prayers of the holy, glorious Apostle and
Evangelist

**N.**, grant you to proclaim the word with much power, for the
fulfilling of the Gospel of his Beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. ****

Deacon:

Amen. ****

And, having bowed with reverence, he takes the Gospel, goes out through
the Holy Doors, and preceded by lights makes his way to the Ambo.

Then the Priest at the Holy Doors, facing west, says:

Wisdom. Stand upright. Let us listen to the Holy Gospel. Peace to all.

****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon:

The reading is from the Holy Gospel according to **N.** ****

People:

Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you.

Priest: Let us attend.

****

The Deacon chants the Gospel for the day. When it is finished the Priest
blesses the Deacon saying:

Peace to you.

****

People:

Glory to you, O Lord, glory to you. ****

The Priest takes the Gospel from the Deacon, kisses it and blesses the
people with it. He then replaces it on the Holy Table.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then the Deacon says the Great Litany:

**Litany of Fervent Supplication**

****

Deacon:

Let us all say, with all our soul and with all our mind, let us say.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

Lord almighty, the God of our fathers, we pray you, hear and have mercy.
****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

Have mercy on us, O God, according to your great mercy, we pray you,
hear and have mercy. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**Three times. And so after the remaining
petitions***)* ****

Deacon:

Also we pray for our Archbishop **N**.

Also we pray for our Sovereign Lady, Queen Elizabeth, the royal family,
her government and all in authority.

\[Also we pray for our father and superior, Priest-monk

**N.**, the Priests, Priest-monks, Deacon-monks and all our brotherhood
in Christ.\]

Again we pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, visitation,
pardon and forgiveness of sins for the servants of God, all devout and
Orthodox Christians, those who dwell in or visit this city and parish,
the wardens and members of this church and their families; \[and for the
servants of God

**N.** & **N.** (**Here the Deacon may name those for whom he has been
asked to pray**), and all who have asked for our prayers, unworthy
though we are.\]

Again we pray for the blessed and ever-remembered founders of this holy
church, and for all our brothers and sisters who have gone to their rest
before us, and who lie asleep here in the true faith; and for the
Orthodox everywhere\[, and for the servants of God

**N.** & **N.** (**Here the Deacon may name those for whom he has been
asked to pray**), and that they may be pardoned all their offences, both
voluntary and involuntary\].

Again we pray for those who bring offerings, those who care for the
beauty of this holy and venerable house, for those who labour in its
service, for those who sing, and for the people here present, who await
your great and rich mercy.

****

The Priest, in a low voice, says the following

**Prayer of Supplication**

Lord, our God, accept this fervent supplication from your servants, and
have mercy on us according to the multitude of your mercy; and send down
your pity on us and on all your people, who await your rich mercy.

****

Priest, aloud:

For you, O God, are merciful and love mankind, and to you we give glory,
to the Father and to the Son and to the holy Spirit, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon:

Catechumens, pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. **And so to each petition as the Priest is praying.**

Deacon:

Believers, let us pray for the catechumens.

That the Lord will have mercy on them.

Instruct them in the word of truth.

Reveal to them the Gospel of righteousness.

Unite them to his Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church.

Save them, have mercy on them, help them and keep them, O God, by your
grace.

Catechumens, bow your heads to the Lord.

****

People:

** To you, O Lord. ****

While this litany is being said, the Priest, taking the holy Gospel and
making the sign of the Cross with it over the Antimension, places it
towards the back of the holy Table and, in a low voice, says the

**Prayer for the Catechumens**

God, our God, creator and maker of all things, who wish all to be saved
and come to the knowledge of the truth, look upon your servants the
catechumens, and deliver them from the ancient error and trickery of the
foe. Call them to eternal life, enlightening their souls and bodies and
numbering them with your rational flock, on which your holy named has
been invoked.

****

Priest, aloud:

That they also, with us, may glorify your all-honoured and majestic
name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and always, and to ages of
ages. ****

People:

** Amen. ****

The Priest opens the Antimension.

Deacon:

As many as are Catechumens, depart. Catechumens, depart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Litany for those Preparing for Enlightenment**

****

From the Wednesday of the 4th week of the Fast after

Catechumens, depart **the Litany for those Preparing for Enlightenment
added.**

Deacon:

** As many as are preparing for Enlightenment, draw near. Those who are
preparing for Enlightenment pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. (**And so after the following petitions**) ****

Deacon:

Believers, for our brethren who are preparing for holy Enlightenment,
let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord our God may give them strength and power.

Enlighten them with the light of knowledge and true religion.

Count them worthy in due time of the bath of rebirth, the forgiveness of
sins and the garment of incorruption.

Give them rebirth through water and Spirit.

Grant them the perfection of the Faith.

Number them with his holy and chosen flock.

Save them, have mercy on them, help them and keep them, O God, by your
grace.

Those preparing for Enlightenment, bow your heads to the Lord.

****

People:

** To you, O Lord.

**Prayer for those preparing for Enlightenment**

Manifest your countenance, Master, to those preparing for holy
Enlightenment and who long to shake off the defilement of sin. Illumine
their understanding; confirm them in the Faith; establish them in Hope,
perfect them in Love; show them to be honourable members of your Christ,
who gave himself as a ransom for our souls.

(

**Aloud**) For you are our enlightenment, and to you we give glory, to
the Father and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and
to the ages of ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Deacon:

As many as are preparing for Enlightenment, depart. Those who are
preparing for Enlightenment, depart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As many as are Catechumens, depart. None of the Catechumens. As many as
are Believers. Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord.

****

People:

** Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your
grace. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Wisdom. ****

Priest, in a low voice:

**First Prayer of the Faithful,\
after the unfolding of the Antimension**

O God, who are great and to be praised, who have brought us from
corruption to incorruption by the life-giving death of your Christ, free
all our senses from the death of the passions, setting over them as a
good leader the thought that comes from within. Let the eye abstain from
every evil sight, the hearing give no entrance to idle words, the tongue
be cleansed of unfitting speech. Purify our lips, Lord, that praise you.
Make our hands keep from base actions, to perform only such things as
are well-pleasing to you, making all our limbs and our mind secure by
your grace.

(

**Aloud**) ** For to you are due all glory, honour and worship, Father,
Son and Holy Spirit, now and always, and to ages of ages. ****

People:

** Amen. ****

Deacon:

Again and again, in peace, let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your
grace. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Deacon:

** Wisdom. ****

Priest, in a low voice:

**Second Prayer of the Faithful**

Holy Master, supremely good, we implore you, the One rich in mercy, to
take pity on us sinners and make us worthy of the reception of your only
begotten Son and our God, the king of glory. For see, his most pure Body
and life-giving Blood, that are entering at this present hour, are about
to be set forth on this mystical table, invisibly escorted by a
multitude of the heavenly host. Grant us communion in them that is
without condemnation, so that, with the eye of our mind illumined
through them, we may become children of the light.

(

**Aloud**): ** According to the gift of your Christ, with whom you are
blessed, together with your all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now
and ever and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

** Amen. ****

Instead of the Cherubic Hymn the following is sung.

Now the hosts of heaven invisibly worship with us; for see, the King of
Glory enters. See, the perfected mystical sacrifice is being borne in.
Alleluia.

****

Then the Priest, (or, according to the more ancient practice, the
Deacon) saying to himself Psalm 50, censes the holy Table, the Prothesis
and the whole sanctuary, the icons and the people as always, the Deacon
standing opposite him as usual. The Priest and Deacon bow and, having
asked pardon of the People, they go to the Prothesis, which the Priest
censes. They make three metanias, saying to themselves,

** O God, cleanse me a sinner and have mercy on me. ****

The Priest takes the Aer and places it on his head; then he takes the
holy Paten and the holy Chalice and makes the great entrance, saying
nothing, or only,

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us, **the Deacon going before him with a candle and censing the
Holy Gifts. On reaching the Altar, the Priest places them on the holy
Table in the usual way. He removes the veils and covers them with Aer
only, saying nothing. He censes them three times and, with the Deacon,
makes three metanias.**

After the Entrance, during which all prostrate to the ground, is sung:

With faith and love, let us draw near that we may become partakers of
everlasting life. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

****

The Holy Doors are shut and the Curtain shut half way.

Then the

Prayer of Saint Ephrem the Syrian**, once.**

At once the Deacon says:

Let us complete our evening prayer to the Lord.

****

People:

Lord, have mercy.

For the precious gifts here set forth and presanctified, let us pray to
the Lord.

That our God, who loves mankind, having accepted them on his holy,
heavenly and spiritual altar, as a sweet-smelling savour of spiritual
fragrance would send down upon us his divine grace and the gift of the
Holy Spirit, let us pray.

For our deliverance from all tribulation, wrath, danger and constraint,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save, have mercy on us and keep us, O God, by your grace.

That the whole evening may be perfect, holy, peaceful and sinless, let
us ask the Lord.

****

People*:*

** Grant this, O Lord. ****

Deacon:

An Angel of peace, faithful guide, guardian of our souls and bodies, let
us ask of the Lord.

Pardon and remission of our sins and offences, let us ask of the Lord.

Things that are good, and profitable for our souls, and peace in the
world, let us ask of the Lord.

That the rest of our life may be spent in peace and repentance, let us
ask of the Lord.

A Christian end to our life, without pain, without shame and peaceful,
and a good defence before the dread judgement seat of Christ, let us
ask.

Having asked for the unity of the faith and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, let us entrust ourselves and each other and our whole life to
Christ our God.

\[**In some editions, instead of the above petition: Commemorating our
all-holy, pure, most blessed and glorious Lady, Mother of God and
Ever-Virgin Mary, with all the Saints, let us entrust ourselves and one
another and our whole life to Christ our God.\]**

* ***People:** To you, O Lord. ****

The priest bows and says the following prayer after setting the Holy
Gifts on the holy Table.

O God of ineffable and unseen mysteries, with whom are the hidden
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, who have revealed to us the service
of this ministry and through your great love for humankind appointed us
sinners to offer you gifts and sacrifices for our own sins and those
committed in ignorance by the people, do you, invisible king, who do
great and unfathomable things, things glorious an extraordinary that are
without number, look upon us, your unworthy servants, who stand before
this your holy altar, as before the throne of the Cherubim, on which,
though the dread mysteries here set forth, rests your Son and our God.
And, having freed us and your faithful people from all uncleanness,
sanctify the souls and bodies of us all with a sanctification that
cannot be taken away, so that receiving communion of these divine and
holy things with a pure conscience, a face unashamed, an enlightened
heart and being given life them, we may be united to your Christ, our
true God, who said, Â‘One who eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides
in me and I in themÂ’. So that, with your Word, Lord, dwelling in us and
living among us, we may become a temple of your holy and adorable
Spirit, having been rescued from every wile of the devil effected by
word or deed or in the mind; and that we may obtain the good things
promised to us, with all your Saints, who have been well-pleasing to you
since time began.

(

**Aloud**): And count us worthy, Master, with boldness and without
condemnation, to dare to call upon you, the God of heaven, as Father,
and to say: ****

The Superior, or the designated monk:

Our Father in heaven, may your name be hallowed, your kingdom come, your
will be done on earth as in heaven. Give us today our daily bread, and
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And do not lead us into
temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.

****

Priest:

** For yours is the kingdom, the power and the glory, of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. ****

People:

** Amen. ****

Priest:

Peace to all. ****

People:

And to your spirit. ****

Deacon

*:* Let us bow our heads to the Lord. ****

People:

To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

**Prayer at the Bowing of Heads**

O God, alone good and compassionate, who dwell on high and watch over
lowly things, with a compassionate eye look upon all your people, guard
them and make us all worthy to partake uncondemned of these your
life-giving mysteries. For to you we have bowed our heads, awaiting from
you rich mercy.

(

**Aloud**)*:* Through the grace and mercy and love for mankind of your
only-begotten Son, with whom you are blessed, together with your
all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and always and to ages of
ages. ****

People:

Amen. ****

Priest

Give heed, Lord Jesus Christ our God, from your holy dwelling-place and
from the glorious throne of your kingdom; and come to sanctify us, you
who are enthroned on high with the Father and invisibly present here
with us. And with your mighty hand grant communion in your most pure
Body and precious Blood to us, and through us to all the people.

****

The Priest bows three times, saying,

** O God cleanse me a sinner, and have mercy on me. ** **Then the Deacon
exclaims:**

Let us attend.

****

The Priest, with the Holy Gifts still covered, placing his hand on the
life-giving Bread, not raising it completely, for it is presanctified,
exclaims:

The presanctified Holy Things for the holy.

****

People:

One is Holy, one is Lord, Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father.
Amen. ****

Communion Chant:

O taste and see that the Lord is good. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia.

****

The Deacon, having entered the Sanctuary, ties his orarion in the form
of a Cross and standing on the right of the Priest says:

Master, break the holy Bread.

****

The Priest divides the Lamb into four parts, saying:

The Lamb of God is broken and distributed, broken yet not divided, ever
eaten yet never consumed, but sanctifies those who partake.

**

**He arranges them on the Paten in the form of a Cross, thus:** ****

IC

NI            

**KA**

XC

**The Deacon points to the Chalice with his Orarion and says:**

Master, fill the holy Cup.

****

The Priest takes the portion of the Lamb stamped with the letters

IC ** **and makes the sign of the Cross with it above the holy Chalice
and places it in it, saying:**

Fullness of the Holy Spirit.

****

Deacon:

Amen. ****

He takes the hot water and says to the Priest:

Master, bless the hot water.

****

The Priest blesses it, saying:

Blessed is the fervour of your holy things, always, now and for ever,
and to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

The Deacon pours the hot water into the Chalice in the form of a cross,
saying:

Fervour of the Holy Spirit. Amen.

****

He asks the forgiveness of those in the Sanctuary and the rest of the
church. Then he approaches the Holy Table and says:

Behold, I draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. ****

He takes a portion of the precious Body of Christ, from the part stamped
with the letters

** **XC, and says:** To me the unworthy Priest \[and Monk\] **N.** is
granted communion in the precious and all-holy Body of our Lord and God
and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for
eternal life. ****

And he receives the Holy Bread with fear and great care; and having
wiped his hand over the Paten with the sponge he says:

Deacon, draw near.

****

The Deacon, as he approaches, says:

Behold, I draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. Grant me,
Master, communion in the precious and all-holy Body of our Lord and God
and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for
eternal life. **The Priest gives the Deacon a portion of the Holy Bread
from the part stamped with** **XC** **and says:** To you, the devout
Deacon \[and Monk\] **N.** is granted communion in the precious and
all-holy Body of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the
forgiveness of your sins and for eternal life. ****

The Deacon kisses the Priest’s hand, goes to the back of the Holy Table,
and communicates like the Priest.

Then the Priest takes the Chalice, with the Communion cloth, and says:

To me the unworthy Priest \[and Monk\] **N.** is granted communion in
the precious and all-holy Blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal life. **He drinks
three times from the Chalice, wipes his lips and the Chalice with the
cloth, and kisses the Chalice, saying:** This has touched my lips: it
will take away my iniquities and cleanse my sins. ****

Then he says:

Deacon, again draw near. **The Deacon, having carefully wiped his hand
over the Paten with the Sponge, approaches, saying:** Behold, again I
draw near to Christ, our immortal King and God. Grant me, Master,
communion in the precious and all-holy Blood of our Lord and God and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of my sins and for eternal
life. ****

The Priest takes the Chalice, with the Communion cloth, and communicates
the Deacon three times, saying:

To you, the devout Deacon \[and Monk\] **N.** is granted communion in
the precious and all-holy Blood of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, for the forgiveness of your sins and for eternal life. **Then he
says:** This has touched your lips: it will take away your iniquities
and cleanse your sins. ****

Then the Deacon, when the Priest has divided the two remaining parts of
the Lamb (

**NI** **and** **KA) into small pieces, places them in the Chalice,
which he covers with the Communion cloth .He places the Star and the
Veils on the Paten and then lays the Spoon on top of the covered
Chalice.**

The Holy Doors are opened and the Priest hands the Chalice to the
Deacon, who comes out through the Holy Doors, holding the Chalice, and
says:

With fear of God, with faith and love, draw near.

****

People:

Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. The Lord is God and has
appeared to us. ****

The Deacon hands the Chalice to the Priest, who gives Communion to the
People, saying to each communicant:

The servant of God

**N.** is granted communion in the precious and all-holy Body and Blood
of our Lord and God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, for the forgiveness of
sins and for eternal life. ****

When all have communicated, the Priest hands the Chalice to the Deacon,
who places it on the holy Table again.

The Priest blesses the People with his hand, saying:

O God, save your people and bless your inheritance.

****

People:

I will bless the Lord at all times; his praise shall always be in my
mouth. Taste the heavenly Bread and the Cup of life, and see that the
Lord is good. Alleluia, Alleluia, Alleluia. ****

The Deacon says to the Priest:

Master, exalt. ****

The Priest censes the Chalice three times, saying each time:

Be exalted, O God, above the heavens; and your glory over all the earth.
****

Then he gives the Paten, with the covers and the Star, to the Deacon,
who shows them to the People and then takes them to the table of the
Prothesis, going round behind the Holy Table. He then unties his
orarion.

The Priest bows, takes the Chalice and

\[**says in a low voice*:*** Blessed is our God, **and**\] **then turns
to the People, shows them the Chalice and continues, aloud:**

Always, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages.

****

People:

Amen. Amen. Amen. For forgiveness of sins and everlasting life. Let our
mouth be filled with your praise, O Lord, that we may sing your glory,
for you have allowed us to share in your holy, divine, immortal and
life-giving mysteries. Keep us in your holiness, that we may meditate on
your justice all the day long. Alleluia. Alleluia. Alleluia. ****

Priest:

Stand upright. Having received the divine, holy, pure, immortal,
heavenly, life-giving and dread Mysteries of Christ, let us give worthy
thanks to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. \[**Or, according to Athonite use:** Glory to you, O
God, glory to you*.*\] ****

Priest:

** Help us, save us, have mercy upon us and keep us, O God, by your
grace. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy.

Priest: Having asked that the whole evening may be perfect, holy,
peaceful and sinless, let us entrust ourselves and one another and our
whole life to Christ our God.

****

People

*:* To you, O Lord. ****

Priest:

**Prayer after Communion**

We thank you, God the Saviour of all things, for all the good things you
have granted us and for the communion of the holy Body and Blood of your
Christ. And we pray you, Master who love mankind, guard us under the
shadow of your wings and grant us, until our last breath, to partake
worthily of your holy gifts, for enlightenment of soul and body and for
inheritance of the kingdom of heaven.

(

**Aloud**): For you are our sanctification, and to you we give glory,
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and always and to ages of ages. ****

People:

** Amen. ****

Priest:

** Let us go forth in peace. ****

People:

In the name of the Lord. ****

Priest:

Let us pray to the Lord. ****

People:

Lord, have mercy. ****

Priest:

**Prayer behind the Ambo**

Master almighty, who fashioned creation with wisdom and through your
ineffable forethought and great goodness have brought us to these most
holy days for the cleansing of souls and bodies, for mastery of the
passions, for hope of resurrection; who through forty days entrusted to
your servant Moses the Tables of the Law in letters divinely traced,
grant us also, good Master, to fight the good fight, to finish the
course of the fast, to keep the faith intact, to smash the heads of
invisible serpents and without condemnation to reach and to worship your
holy Resurrection.

(

**Aloud**): ** For blessed and glorified is your all-honoured and
majestic name, of Father, Son and Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to
the ages of ages. ****

After the prayer behind the Ambo:

Amen. Blessed be the name of Lord, from this time forth and for
evermore. (**Three times**) ****

The Priest goes to the Prothesis and says the following prayer in a low
voice:

Lord our God, who have brought us to these most holy days, and have made
us communicants of your dread mysteries, join us to your rational flock
and declare us to be heirs of your kingdom, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. Amen.

****

Priest:

The blessing of the Lord be upon you, through his divine grace and love
for mankind, always, now and ever, and to ages of ages. ****

Reader:

** Amen. ****

And the Priest gives the Dismissal:

\
Glory to you, Christ God, our hope, glory to you. ****

Reader:

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit; both now
and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen. Lord, have mercy
(**x3**)*.* Holy Father, give the blessing. ****

And the Priest continues:

May Christ our true God, at the prayers of his most pure and holy
Mother; by the power of the precious and life-giving Cross, through the
protection of the honoured, Bodiless Powers of heaven, through the
intercessions of the honoured, glorious Prophet, Forerunner and Baptist,
John, of the holy, glorious and all-praised Apostles, of the holy,
glorious and triumphant Martyrs, of our venerable and God-bearing
Fathers and Mothers; of the holy and righteous forebears of God, Joachim
and Anne; of Saint

**N.** \[**the patron of the church**\], of Saint **N.**, whose memory
we celebrate; \[of our Father among the Saints Gregory the Dialogist,
Pope of Rome, whose liturgy we have celebrated,\] and of all the Saints,
have mercy on us and save us, for he is good and loves mankind. ****

Then, while the Priest distributes the Antidoron, the Reader says:

Glory. Both now.

**Psalm 33**

I will bless the Lord continually, his praise will always be in my
mouth.

My soul will be praised in the Lord; let the meek hear it and rejoice.

Magnify the Lord with me, let us exalt his name together.

I sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all my
afflictions.

Come to him and be enlightened, and your faces will not be ashamed.

This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him from all his
afflictions.

The angel of the Lord will encamp round those who fear him, and deliver
them.

Taste and see that the Lord is good. Blessed the one who hopes in him!

Fear the Lord, all you his holy ones, for those who fear him never want.

The rich have become poor and gone hungry, but those who seek the Lord
will not be deprived of any good.

Come, children, listen to me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

Who is there who wants life, loves to see good days?

Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from speaking deceit.

Turn away from evil and do good, seek peace and pursue it.

The eyes of the Lord are on the just, and his ears towards their
supplication.

The LordÂ’s face is set against those who do evil, to destroy their
memory from the earth.

The just cried and the Lord heard them, and delivered them from all
their afflictions.

The Lord is close to those who are broken-hearted, and will save the
humble in spirit.

The afflictions of the just are many, but the Lord will deliver them
from them all.

The Lord guards all their bones, not one of them will be broken.

The death of sinners is evil, and those who hate the just will go
astray.

The Lord will rescue the souls of his servants, and no one of those who
hope in him will go astray.

**Psalm 144**

I will exalt you, my God, my King; and I will bless your name for ever
and to age on age.

Every day I will bless you; and praise your name for ever and to age on
age.

The Lord is great and highly to be praised**;** and there is no limit to
his greatness.

Generation after generation will praise your works; and will declare
your power.

They will tell of the majesty of the glory of your holiness; and will
recount your wonders.

They will speak of the power of your dread deeds; and will recount your
greatness.

They will proclaim the memory of the multitude of your goodness; and
rejoice in your justice.

The Lord is compassionate and merciful; long-suffering and full of
mercy.

The Lord is good to all; and his acts of compassion are for all his
works.

May all your works confess you, Lord; and all your holy ones bless you.

They will speak of the glory of your kingdom; and tell of your power.

To make known your power and of the glory the majesty of your kingdom to
the children of mankind.

Your kingdom is a kingdom for all the ages, and your dominion for every
generation.

The Lord is faithful in all his words, and holy in all his works.

The Lord supports all who are falling, and sets upright all who are
broken down.

The eyes of all hope in you, and you give them their food in due season.

You open your hand, and fill every living thing with your good pleasure.

The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works.

The Lord is close to those who call on him, to all who call on him in
truth.

He will do the will of those who fear him, and hear their supplication
and save them.

The Lord guards all who love him, and all sinners he will destroy.

My mouth will tell the praise of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his
holy name for ever and to age on age.

****

Turning to the East, the Priest says:

Through the prayers of our holy Fathers, Lord Jesus Christ our God, have
mercy on us.

****

People: ****

Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
