\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](athanasios_of_alexandria.md) \]

[Psalm 22](psalm_22.md)  
[Psalm 86](psalm_86.md)

## COMMENTARY ON THE PSALTER

Saint Athanasios Archbishop of Alexandria (c. 296-373) wrote one of the
earliest complete Christian commentaries on the Book of Psalms. There
are a number of problems about the text and the authenticity of parts of
it and there is no proper critical edition, nor, to the best of my
knowledge, any English translation. These pages, then, are to a great
extent pioneering and provisional.

I have not, for the moment, translated the passages that are of suspect
authenticity. They often seem to be duplicate comments to ones in the
generally accepted text.

St Athanasios writes not so much a full commentary as a series of short
notes, or scholia, on whole verse or individual words or phrases. These
discuss not only the original meaning of the Psalms in the context of
the story of the People of God under the Old Covenant but also the
prophetic and typological nature of the Psalter. It is not for nothing
that David is known in the Church as both Prophet and King.

As an introduction to the commentary readers of this page are warmly
encouraged to read St Athanasios Letter to Marcellinus, which has been
translated into English a number of times. At least two of these are
available on the web at <http://www.athanasius.com/psalms/alettem.htm>
and [http://people.ne.mediaone.net/nchin/marcelli.htm](http://). I have
not checked either of these versions. Neither of these links seems to
work properly, but the first can be found by going to
[http://www.athanasius.com](http://www.athanasius.com/psalms/alettem.htm)
and clicking on the link there to Spiritual Texts. The second seems to
work if you go to it through a search engine, like Google.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

