\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](triodion.md) \]
\[ [Readings](readLent.md) \] \[ Tax Collector and Pharisee \]
\[ [Prodigal Son](ProdigalE.md) \] \[ [Cheese Week](cheese_week.md) \]
\[ [Sunday of Orthodoxy](sunday_of_orthodoxy.md) \]
\[ [Sunday of the Cross](sunday_of_the_cross.md) \]
\[ [Palm Sunday](palm.md) \] \[ [Holy Week](holyweek.md) \]
\[ [Carnival Week](carnival_week.md) \]

**TRIODION**

# SUNDAY OF THE TAX COLLECTOR AND THE PHARISEE

**ON SATURDAY EVENING**

## AT VESPERS

**After the Opening Psalm we read** Blessed is the man **(the first
Kathisma of the Psalter). At** Lord, I have cried**, we insert 10
Stichera: 7 of the Resurrection in the Tone of the week from the
Octoichos, and the following Idiomels from the Triodion, doubling the
first.**

**Tone 1**

Brethren, let us not pray like the Pharisee, for those who exalt
themselves will be humbled. Let us be humbled before God through fasting
like the Tax Collector, as we cry aloud, ‘God forgive[\[1\]](#_ftn1) us
sinners’.[\[2\]](#_ftn2) (Twice)**

A Pharisee, conquered by vainglory, and a Tax Collector, bowed down in
repentance, drew near to you, the only Master. The one by boasting was
deprived of God’s good things, while the other by not uttering was found
worthy of gifts. Strengthen me[\[3\]](#_ftn3) by these sighs of sorrow,
Christ our God, for you love humankind.

Glory. **Tone 8**

Almighty Lord, I know how powerful tears are. They brought Ezekias up
from the gates of death.[\[4\]](#_ftn4) They delivered the sinful woman
from the transgressions of many years.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) They justified the
Tax Collector above the Pharisee. And so I pray, ‘Numbering me with them
with them, have mercy on me’.

Both now.

**The 1st Theotokion in the Tone of the week from the Octoichos,
followed by the Entrance,** O Joyful Light**, **** and the Prokeimenon
of the day,** The Lord is King.

**At the Liti, Stichera of the Saint of the monastery.**

**\[**Glory. **Tone 3.**

Understanding the difference between the Tax Collector and the Pharisee,
my soul, hate the proud speech of the one, and eagerly imitate the
deeply contrite prayer of the other, crying aloud, ‘God forgive me a
sinner and have mercy on me’.[\[6\]](#_ftn6)

Both now. **Theotokion. Same Tone.**

Virgin Mother of God, we praise you as the means of the salvation of our
race; for your Son and our God, who through the Cross accepted suffering
in the flesh he had taken from you, has redeemed us from corruption, for
he loves humankind.**\]**[\[7\]](#_ftn7)

**We sing the Aposticha in the Tone of the Week from the Octoichos, and
then:**

Glory. **Tone 5.**

My eyes have been weighed down through my iniquities, and I am unable to
look up and gaze on the height of heaven. But receive me, O Saviour, as
I repent like the Tax Collector, and have mercy on me.

Both now. **Theotokion. Same Tone.**

You are temple and gate, palace and throne of the King, all-honoured
Virgin. Through you, my Redeemer, Christ the Lord, appeared to those who
sat in darkness, for he is the Sun of justice, who wishes to enlighten
those whom he fashioned in his own image by his own hand. Therefore, O
All-praised, as you have a mother’s freedom to speak with him, intercede
unceasingly that our souls may be saved.

**Apolytikion,** Virgin Mother of God**, three times.**

**After the blessing and distribution of the Loaves, a major Reading.**

**\[If Vespers are celebrated on their own, Apolytikion of the
Resurrection and Theotokion in the Tone of the week\].**

**Note that we chant the Office of the Saint of the day at Compline on
the preceding Friday, or when the Ecclesiarch thinks fitting, unless the
commemoration of a major saint occurs.**

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) See note 6, below.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Luke 18:10-14.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Psa. 50:14

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) 2 Reigns 20:1-6

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Luke 7:36-50

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) The translation of the last two clauses is a problem.
The first is a quotation from the parable, which is almost always
translated ‘God, be merciful to me a sinner’; the second is the
extremely common prayer ‘Have mercy on me’, *eleison me.* The prayer in
the Gospel could equally well be rendered ‘Be gracious to me’, or
‘forgive me’. The familiar prayer to the Holy Trinity, ‘All-holy
Trinity, have mercy on us. Lord, wipe away our sins’ is not from this
passage, but from Psalm 78:9, where the Septuagint is translating the
Hebrew *kipper*, which probably means ‘wipe away’, though some scholars
believe it means ‘cover’. The former meaning explains the Slavonic
translation. The Greek verb is extremely rare in the Bible, occurring
about a dozen times in the Old and only twice in the New Testament. 

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Unlike the Slavonic, the current Greek Triodion makes
no special provision for the Liti. The Slavonic books give the third
Idiomel in Tone 3 from Lauds as the Doxastikon and the Resurrection
Theotokion in the same Tone. 

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

