\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](horologion.md) \]
\[ Saints of the Month \]
\[ [Vespers for Sundays and Feasts](vespers.md) \]
\[ [Matins for Sundays and Feasts](mat-sun.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Matins](weekday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Midnight Office](midnight_office.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Midnight Office](saturday_midnight_office.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Midnight Office](sunday_midnight_office.md) \]
\[ [Lesser Hours](lesser_hours.md) \]
\[ [Small Compline](small_compline.md) \]
\[ [Lenten Offices](lenten_offices.md) \]
\[ [Little Paraklesis](lit-parak.md) \]

[September](septembe.md)  
[October](october.md)  
[November](november.md)  
[December](december.md)  
[January](january.md)  
[February](feb.md)  
[June](june.md)  
[July](july.md)  
[August](august.md)

Each month we hope to publish the Troparia for the Saints of the month
as they are found in the Greek editions of the ***Mega Horologion***, or
***Large Book of Hours***. The texts for each day are traditionally
accompanied by brief notes on the Saints or events commemorated, and
they provide a sort of miniature ***Synaxarion***, though their
historical reliability is often uncertain, to say the least.

There is much variation among the different editions of the ***Book of
Hours*** in the texts of the Apolytikia. This is due in part to the
increasing tendency to provide each Saint with an individual
Apolytikion, where the older books give the general Apolytikion for the
particular class of Saint. This tendency culminated in the work of the
late Fr Gerasimos of the Skete of Little Saint Anne on Mount Athos, who
provided special texts for every Saint included in the book. These are
given as alternatives in the current edition published by the
***Apostoliki Diakonia*** in Athens. The present translation is
conservative and limits the special Apolytikia to a minimum.

Unlike the Apolytikia, there are no common Kontakia and the texts given
in the various editions of the ***Menaia*** and the ***Book of Hours***
often vary widely.

The Saints who have hymns in the ***Book of Hours*** represent but a
tiny fraction of those commemorated by name only in the daily
***Synaxarion*** that is read at Matins after the Kontakion. I hope to
begin work on these soon, but it will take some time to complete.

The present translations are based on three editions: 1\] that published
by the ***Apostoliki Diakonia*** in 1974, 2\] that published by
***Astir*** in 1974, which is a reprint of the Venetian edition of 1856,
with an Appendix containing the additions by Fr Gerasimos: 3\] that
published by ***Phos*** in 1975, which claims to be ’according to the
edition of the Ecumenical Patriarchate’. It is most ’archaic’ of the
three.

Where possible the translations are taken from the edition of the
*****Divine Liturgy of St John Chrysostom***** of the Archdiocese of
Thyateira and Great Britain (OUP 1995) and from *****An Orthodox Prayer
Book*****, published by OUP in May 1999 \[ISBN 0-19-122447-2\].

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

