\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](pentecos.md) \]
\[ [Pascha Midnight](PaschaN.md) \] \[ [Pascha All](pascha.md) \]
\[ [Sunday of Thomas](ThomasSun.md) \]
\[ [Sunday of the Myrrhbearers](myrrh-sun.md) \]
\[ [Sunday of The Paralysed Man](ParalSun.md) \]
\[ [Midpentecost](midpent.md) \] \[ Sunday of the Samaritan Woman \]
\[ [Sunday of the Blind man](blindsunday.md) \]
\[ [Assumption](assumpti.md) \] \[ [Fathers of Nicea](fathers.md) \]
\[ [Pentecost](PentAll.md) \] \[ [All Saints](allsaints.md) \]

## 

AT SMALL VESPERS

****

At

Lord, I have cried**… we insert 4 Stichera, and sing 3 Resurrection
Stichera from the Oktoichos, and on by Anatolios.**

Glory.

Finding the woman of Samaria by the well of Jacob, Jesus, who covers the
earth with clouds, asked water of her. O the wonder\! He who rides on
the Cherubim converses with a woman who is a harlot. He asks for water,
who hung the earth upon the waters. He seeks water, who pours out
springs and pools of water, as he wishes truly to draw her who is hunted
by the warlike foe, and to quench with the water of life the thirst of
her who is aflame with foul desires, as he alone is compassionate and
loves mankind.

Both now.

**Dogmatic Theotokion. Tone 4.**

You conceived without seed, and ineffably you bore the One who put down
the mighty from their throne and exalts the humble and raises the horn
of his faithful ones, who glorify the Cross and the Tomb and the
glorious Resurrection of Christ. Therefore, Mother of God, with never
silent hymns we call you blessed, the source of such great goods, as you
ever intercede that our souls may be saved.

****

Aposticha. Prosomia of the Mother of God.

Called from the highest.

Verse: **

I shall remember your name in every generation and generation.

God, the Son begotten without time from the Father who has no beginning,
through condescension and for the salvation of mortals became man, that
he might now grant Paradise to the First-formed and at the same time
redeem all nature from the deception of the serpent and save the fallen
image as he is easily placated. Therefore he made his Mother the Pure
undefiled Mother of the Bridegroom, whom we have all gained as the
anchor of our souls.

****

Verse:

** Listen, daughter, and see, and incline your ear; and forget your
people and your father’s house.

You held in your womb, O blessed of God, the incarnate Creator of all
things as he refashioned humankind, which through the serpent had once
fallen by the transgression. For you gave birth ineffably in the flesh
to our God, and through your bearing child you freed from corruption all
nature that had grown old. Therefore we praise and glorify your grace,
Virgin without bridegroom, as we implore that through you we may be
delivered from every punishment.

****

Verse:

The rich among the people of the land will entreat your favour.

That you may reveal to us all the multitude of your mercy and the
limitless ocean of your loving-kindness, wipe away the sins of your
servants. For as you are Mother of God, O All-blameless, you have
authority over creation and by your power you order all things as you
will; for the grace of the holy Spirit clearly dwells in you and with
you is at in all things everlastingly, O All-blessed.

Glory.

**** Tone 8*.***

When through your inexpressible dispensation, Christ God, you appeared
on earth, the woman of Samaria, having heard your word, full of love for
mankind, left her bucket at the well and ran saying to those in the
city: Come, see the one who knows the heart: is not this the expected
Christ, who has great mercy?

Both now.

**The same Tone.**

At the mid-point of the feast, as you were teaching, O Saviour, the Jews
said: How does this man know letters, never having learned? They did not
recognize that you are the Wisdom who set in order the world. Glory to
you\!

****

Resurrection Apolytikion, and that of Mid-Pentecost.

Litany and Dismissal.

## 

AT GREAT VESPERS

****

After

Christ has risen**, the Opening Psalm etc.**

At

Lord, I have cried **we insert 10 stichera and we sing 4 of the
Resurrection, 3 of Mid-Pentecost and 3 Idiomels of the Samaritan
Woman.**

Resurrection Stichera. Tone 4.

As we worship without ceasing your life-giving Cross, Christ God, we
glorify your Resurrection on the third day, for through it, O
All-powerful, you renewed corrupted human nature and showed us the way
up to heaven, for you alone are good and love mankind.

By being willingly nailed to the tree of the Cross, O Saviour, you
abolished the penalty of the tree of disobedience; and by descending
into Hell, O Powerful one, you tore apart the bonds of death as God;
therefore we worship your Resurrection from the dead, as we cry out with
joy: All-powerful Lord, glory to you\!

You smashed the gates of Hell, Lord, and by your death you destroyed the
palace of death; while you freed the human race from corruption,
granting the world life and incorruption, and your great mercy.

****

Other Verses by Anatolios.

Come you peoples, let us hymn the Saviour’s Rising on the third day,
through which we were redeemed from unbreakable bonds of Hell and all
received incorruption and life, as we cry: You, who were crucified and
buried and rose again, save us by your Resurrection, only lover of
mankind.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost.  
Lord, by ascending the Cross. Same Tone.

The mid-point of the days is here, which begin with the saving
Resurrection and are sealed by the divine Pentecost. It shines for it
shares the brilliance of them both, and unites the two, and it is
honoured for it reveals in advance the coming glory of the Master’s
Assumption.

Sion heard and was glad, when the good tidings of the Resurrection were
proclaimed. Her faithful offspring rejoiced when they saw him also
washing away by the Spirit the stain of the murder of Christ. Keeping
festival she makes ready the joyful mid-point of the two.

The abundant outpouring of the divine Spirit upon all draws near, as it
is written; the herald is the day that forms the half-way mark of the
certain promise which was given by Christ to his Disciples after his
death and burial and Resurrection, and shows the manifestation of the
Paraclete.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. Idiomels. Tone 1.

The source of wonders came to the source at the sixth hour to catch the
fruit of Eve; for at the same hour Eve had left Paradise by the
deception of the serpent. The woman of Samaria then came near to draw
water. When the Saviour saw her he said: Give me water to drink and I
will fill you with water welling up. The wise woman ran to the city, and
at once announced to the crowds: Come, see Christ the Lord, the Saviour
of our souls.

****

Tone 2. \[By Romanos\].

When the Lord came to the well, the woman of Samaria asked the
compassionate one: Grant me the water of faith and I shall receive the
streams of the font: joy and redemption. Giver of life, Lord, glory to
You.

****

Same tone.

The Son and Word of the Father, like him without beginning, like him
eternal, the source of healings, came to the source; and a woman from
Samaria approached to draw water. Seeing her, the Saviour said: Give me
water to drink, and go, call your husband. But she, as though talking
with a man and not with God, keen to deceive, said: I have no husband.
The Teacher answered her: You say truly: I have no husband, for you have
had five, and the one you have now is not your husband. But she, smitten
by the word, ran to the city and cried out to the crowds, saying: Come,
see Christ, who grants the world his great mercy.

Glory.

**Tone 6.**

Finding the woman of Samaria by the well of Jacob, Jesus, who covers the
earth with clouds, asked water of her. O the wonder\! He who rides on
the Cherubim converses with a woman who is a harlot. He who hung the
earth upon the waters, asks for water. He who pours out springs and
pools of water, seeks water, as he wishes truly to draw her who is
hunted by the warlike foe, and to quench with the water of life the
thirst of her who is aflame with foul desires, as he alone is
compassionate and loves mankind.

Both now. **

**Tone 4.**

The Prophet David, through you the ancestor of God, spoke of you in song
beforehand to him who has done great things for you: The Queen stood at
your right hand. For Christ, the God who, without father, was well
pleased to become man from you, declared you to be mother, source of
life, so that he, who has great and rich mercy, might refashion his own
image, corrupted by passions, and, having found the lost sheep wandering
on the mountain and laid it on his shoulders, might bring it to his
Father; and by his own will, O Mother of God, unite it to the heavenly
Powers and save the world.

****

At the Liti the Sticheron of the Saint of the Monastery as usual.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 3.**

Let heaven and earth to-day radiantly be glad, for Christ has appeared
in flesh as man to free all Adam’s race from the curse; and by wonders
he is made wonderful. When he comes to Samaria, he approaches a woman,
and he who is wrapped in the waters of a cloud, seeks water. Therefore
all we faithful worship him who willingly became poor for our sakes in
his compassionate purpose.

****

At the Aposticha Resurrection Sticheron from the Oktoichos.  
Tone 4.

Lord, by ascending the Cross you wiped out our ancestral curse, and by
descending into Hell you freed those enchained from every age, granting
incorruption to the human race; therefore with hymns we glorify your
life-giving and saving Rising.

****

Then the Easter Stichera with their verses. Tone 5.

Let God arise, and his enemies be scattered: and let those that hate him
flee before his face.

A sacred Pascha has been shown forth to us to-day, a new and holy
Pascha, a mystic Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha, a Pascha that is
Christ the Redeemer, a spotless Pascha, a great Pascha, a Pascha of the
faithful, a Pascha that has opened unto us the gates of Paradise, a
Pascha that hallows all the faithful.

As smoke is dispersed, so let them be dispersed: as wax melts before the
fire.

Come from that scene, O women, bearers of good tidings, and say to Zion:
Receive from us the tidings of joy, of the Resurrection of Christ.
Exult, dance and be glad, O Jerusalem, for you have seen Christ the King
as a bridegroom come forth from the tomb.

So shall the wicked perish at the presence of God: but the righteous
shall be glad.

The myrrh-bearing women at deep dawn drew near to the tomb of the giver
of life; they found an Angel sitting on the stone, and he addressing
them in this manner said: Why seek the living among the dead? Why mourn
the incorruptible amid corruption? Go proclaim it unto his Disciples.

This is the day that the Lord has made: let us rejoice and be glad in
it.

A Pascha of delight, Pascha, the Lord’s Pascha, an all-venerable Pascha
has dawned for us, a Pascha wherein let us embrace one another with joy.
O Pascha, ransom from sorrow\! To-day Christ has shone forth from the
tomb as from a bridal chamber, and has filled the women with joy,
saying: Proclaim it to the Apostles.

Glory.

**** Tone 8*.***

When through your inexpressible dispensation, Christ God, you appeared
on earth, the woman of Samaria, having heard your word, full of love for
mankind, left her bucket at the well and ran saying to those in the
city: Come, see the one who knows the heart: is not this the expected
Christ, who has great mercy?

Both now.

**The same Tone.**

At the mid-point of the feast, as you were teaching, O Saviour, the Jews
said: How does this man know letters, never having learned? They did not
recognize that you are the Wisdom who set in order the world. Glory to
you\!

****

Resurrection Apolytikion.

When the women Disciples of the Lord had learnt from the Angel the
joyful message of the Resurrection, casting away the ancestral
condemnation, triumphantly they said to the Apostles: Death has been
despoiled, Christ God has been raised, granting the world his great
mercy.

****

Another, of the Feast. Tone 8.

At the mid-point of the Feast, O Saviour, water my thirsty soul with
streams of true devotion; for you cried out to all: Any who thirst, let
them come to me, and let them drink\! O Source of life, Christ our God,
glory to you\!

****

And Dismissal.

## 

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st Psalter reading Kathismata from the Oktoichos.  
Tone 4.

As they looked at the entrance of the tomb and were unable to endure the
bright flame of the Angel, the Myrrh-bearing women trembled with
amazement and said, ‘Can the One who opened Paradise to the Thief have
been stolen? Can he who before his passion proclaimed his Rising have
been raised? Truly Christ God has risen, granting those in Hell life and
resurrection’.

****

Verse:

Arise, Lord my God, lift up your hand; do not forget your poor for ever.

You rose from Hell as immortal, O Saviour, and raised your world with
you by your Resurrection, Christ our God; with strength you broke the
might of death, and revealed the Resurrection to all, O Merciful:
therefore we also glorify you, only lover of mankind.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The mystery hidden from all eternity and unknown to Angels has been
revealed to those on earth through you, O Mother of God: God being made
flesh in a union without confusion, and willingly accepting the Cross
for us, through which he raised the first-formed man, and saved our
souls from death.

****

After the 2nd Psalter reading, Kathisma.

Tone 4. At your conceiving

Coming down from the heights above, Gabriel approached the rock where
the Rock of life was lying, and clothed in white he cried aloud to the
weeping women: Cease your cry of lamentation; now you have compassion
for ever. Take courage, for the One you seek weeping has truly risen.
Therefore cry out to the Apostles that the Lord has risen.

****

Verse:

I will praise you, O Lord, with my whole heart; I will tell of all your
marvellous works. ****

Same melody.

By your willing counsel, Saviour, you underwent the Cross, and mortal
men laid in a new tomb him who sustains the ends of the earth by a word;
and so the stranger, death, was put in chains and terribly despoiled;
and all in Hell cried out at your life-bearing Rising: Christ has risen,
the Life-giver, and remains to the ages.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. Model Melody. \[By Romanos\]**

At your conceiving without seed, O Mother of God, Joseph was struck with
wonder as he contemplated what was beyond nature, and he brought to mind
the dew on the fleece, the bush unburned by fire, Aaron’s rod which
blossomed; and your Betrothed and guardian bore witness and cried to the
priests: A Virgin bears a child, and after child-birth remains still a
virgin.

****

After Psalm 118, the Evlogitaria, the Ypakoï. Tone 4.

The Myrrh-bearers proclaimed to the Apostles the news of your wondrous
Rising, O Christ: that as God you had risen, granting the world your
great mercy.

****

The Anavathmi of the Tone. Antiphon 1.

From my youth many passions make war on me: but you, O Saviour, help me
and save me. May you who hate Sion be put to shame by the Lord: you will
be withered up as grass by fire.

Glory. Both now.

By the Holy Spirit every soul is given life; by cleansing it is exalted
it is made bright by the Threefold Unity in a sacred mystery.

****

Antiphon 2.

I have called fervently to you, Lord, out of the depths of my soul: let
your divine ears be attentive to me.

Everyone who has placed his hope in the Lord; is exalted higher than
those who grieve.

Glory. Both now.

By the Holy Spirit the streams of grace well up; watering all creation
to engender life.

****

Antiphon 3.

May my heart be exalted towards you, O Word; and let none of the
pleasures of the world entice me to earthly-mindedness.

As a man has love for his mother; so we should have even greater
affection for the Lord.

Glory. Both now.

By the Holy Spirit comes wealth of divine knowledge and contemplation
and wisdom; for in him the Word reveals all the Father’s teachings.

****

Prokeimenon.

Arise, Lord, help us and redeem us: for the glory of your name.

****

Verse:

We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us: what
things you did in their time, in the days of old. ****

Then

Let everything that has breath**. The 7th Resurrection Gospel etc.**

The Canons, of Pascha with that of the Mother of God to 6, of
Mid-Pentecost to 4 and of the Samaritan Woman to 4.

Canon of Pascha. Tone 1. Ode 1.  
Irmos.

‘The day of Resurrection, let us be radiant, O peoples: Pascha, the
Lord’s Pascha; for Christ God has brought us from death to life, and
from earth to heaven, as we sing the triumphal song’.

****

Troparia.

Let us purify our senses, and we shall see Christ shining forth, in the
unapproachable light of the resurrection, and we shall clearly hear Him
saying ‘Rejoice\!’, as we sing the triumphal song.

Let the heavens as is fitting rejoice, and let the earth be glad, let
the whole world, both seen and unseen, keep the feast: for Christ has
risen, our eternal joy.

****

Canon of the Mother of God. Tone 1.  
The Acrostic in the first Troparia: T h e o p h a n.  
Ode 1. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-t.gif (995 bytes)](dropcap-t.gif)he boundary of death you
forced open, all-pure Virgin, by bearing Christ the eternal Life, who
shone out to-day from the tomb, and enlightened the world.

Having seen your Son and God risen from the dead, you rejoice with the
Apostles, O holy and full of grace, and as cause of the joy of all, O
all-pure Mother of God, you first received the greeting ‘Rejoice’.

****

Canon of Mid-Pentecost.  
Tone 8. Ode 1. You fixed the sea.

Nations clap your hands, Hebrews lament, for Christ the giver of life
has torn asunder the chains of Hell, and raised the dead, and healed the
sick with a word. This is our God, who gives life to those who believe
in his name.

You showed a wonder by changing water into wine, O Master, who changed
the rivers of Egypt into blood. And you raised the dead, perfecting this
second sign. Glory, O Saviour, to your counsel, glory to your abasement,
through which You have made us new.

O Lord, you are an ever-flowing stream of true life, you are our
resurrection; willingly you toiled, my Saviour; and as you wished you
thirsted, subject to nature’s laws; and coming in the flesh to Sychar
you sought water to drink of the woman of Samaria.

****

Theotokion.

You alone, Mother of God, contained your creator in your womb and
inexpressibly carried Him in the flesh, and you remained a Virgin, your
virginity quite unharmed; beseech Him, O pure one, unceasingly, as your
Son and God, on behalf of your flock for ever.

****

Canon of the Samaritan Woman. Tone 4.  
With an acrostic in the 9th Ode: J o s e p h.

Composition of Joseph of Thessaloniki.

Ode 1. The Irmos.

\[‘You struck Egypt and drowned the tyrant Pharao in the sea, and saved
a people from slavery, as they sang Moses’ song of victory: For he has
been glorified.’\]

****

Troparia.

The Buried has arisen, and with him raised the human race; let all
creation rejoice, and let all the spiritual clouds to-day clearly rain
down justice.

Having willingly accepted the cross in the flesh, you rose on the third
day from the dead, Lord, source of life, emptying Hell’s storehouses and
leading out the fettered souls.

O Lord, who lay the beams of your chambers on the water, you are the
water of life and you granted hallowed streams to the woman of Samaria
when she asked, for she recognised your compassion.

Glory.

O Trinity, Father, Son and Spirit, as maker of all things save those who
glorify you with pure faith, and grant pardon of our sins, as you are
supremely good.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Hail throne of fire, hail lampstand all of gold, hail cloud of light,
hail palace of the Word, and spiritual table, who fittingly carry
Christ, the bread of life.

****

Katavasia.

The Day of Resurrection. ****

Ode 3. Irmos.

‘Come let us drink a new drink, not one marvellously brought forth from
a barren rock, but the Source of incorruption, which springs up from the
tomb of Christ, in whom we are established’.

****

Troparia.

Now all things are filled with light, both heaven and earth and those
beneath the earth: so let all creation sing Christ’s rising, by which it
is established.

Yesterday I was buried with You O Christ, to-day I rise with You as You
arise: yesterday I was crucified with You, glorify me with You, Saviour,
in your Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)oly one, to-day I return to
life undefiled through the goodness of Him who was born from you and
whose brightness shines to the ends of the earth.

Seeing the God, whom you conceived in the flesh, rising from the dead as
He said, O holy one, dance; and magnify Him as God, O immaculate.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. My heart has been established.

Do not judge according to appearance, O Jews, said the Master, as he
stood teaching in the temple, as it is written, at the mid-point of the
feast according to the law.

Do not judge according to appearance, O Jews; for Christ has come, whom
the Prophets declared would come from Sion, and call back the world.

If you do not believe the words, O Jews, be convinced by the Master’s
works: why do you err, rejecting the Holy One of whom Moses wrote in the
Law?

****

Theotokion.

Being one of the Trinity, You were seen to have become flesh without
changing your Essence, Lord, or burning the incorrupt womb of her who
bore You, though You are wholly God and fire.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘My heart is established in the Lord, who grants the prayer of him who
prays; for He has weakened the mighty bow, and the weak are girded with
power.’\]

****

Troparia.

Willingly you were lifted up on the tree, O Word, and seeing it the
rocks were rent, and all creation was shaken, and the dead arose from
the graves as from sleep.

When all the souls of the just saw you coming to Hell with your soul, O
Word, they were released from their eternal chains as they hymned your
power beyond understanding.

Why are you amazed? Why with spices do you seek the Master in a grave, O
Women? He has risen, and has raised the world with himself, cried the
dazzling Angel to the Myrrhbearers.

As Life and the source of immortality you sat down by the source, O
Merciful, and filled with your all-wise streams the Woman of Samaria who
asked and hymned you.

Glory.

One God in Trinity is hymned over all, the Father, Son and divine
Spirit, whom the armies of heaven glorify in fear, as they clearly cry
out: Holy, Holy, Holy, are you to the ages.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Beyond explanation you conceived in the womb, O Virgin Mother, and
beyond understanding and reason you gave birth to the God of all things,
remaining a Virgin as before child-birth, O Bride of God.

****

Katavasia.

Come let us drink. ****

Kontakion of Mid-Pentecost.  
Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.

At the mid-point of the feast according to the law, O Christ God, Maker
of all things and Master, you said to those before you: Come, and draw
the water of immortality: therefore we fall down before you and with
faith we cry: Grant us your mercies, for you are the source of our life.

****

Kathisma of the Woman of Samaria. Same melody.

Let heaven rejoice, and things on earth dance, for Christ, having
appeared from a Virgin as man, has delivered all mankind from corruption
by his own death; but, having shone with wonders, he asks water of the
Woman of Samaria and bestows a source of healings, for he alone is
immortal.

Glory. Both now.  

**Of Mid-Pentecost. Same melody.**

O Giver of wisdom and Master, when the feast according to the Law had
come, You sat in the temple and taught, speaking thus to all: Come, you
who thirst, drink of the stream which I now give you; through which, you
will all enjoy life in God and delight.

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

‘Let the Prophet Avvakoum, inspired by God, keep the divine watch with
us, and show forth the radiant Angel, who with resounding voice
declares: To-day brings salvation to the world, for Christ has risen as
omnipotent’.

****

Troparia.

Christ appeared as a male who opened a virgin womb: but as our food he
is called ‘lamb’: ‘unblemished’, as our Passover without stain: and
‘perfect’ for he is true God.

As a yearling lamb, for us the blessed crown, Christ was willingly
sacrificed for all, a cleansing Passover: and from the tomb the fair sun
of justice has shone for us again.

God’s forebear David dancing leaped before the Ark, mere shadow : but
seeing the fulfilment of the types, let us, God’s holy people, inspired,
rejoice, for Christ is risen as omnipotent.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)ven He who fashioned Adam
your forefather, O holy one, is fashioned from you, and by his own death
He has destroyed Adam’s death to-day, and shed light on all with the
divine beams of his Resurrection.

Seeing Christ, whom your bore, shining in beauty from the dead, O Pure
one, fair and lovely and spotless among women, as you rejoice to-day
with the Apostles at the salvation of all, glorify Him.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. The prophet Avvakoum.

If the Messias must come; but the Messias is Christ, lawless ones, why
do you not believe him? See, he has come and what he does bears witness:
he made water wine and braced the paralytic with a word.

Not understanding the Scriptures, you are all in error, lawless Hebrews:
for Christ has truly come and enlightened all, and among you he has
shown many signs and wonders; and vainly you deny true life.

One work I showed you and you all marvel, cried Christ to the Jews: you
yourselves circumcise a man even on the Sabbath, he says: why then do
you attack me for raising a paralytic with a word?

****

Theotokion.

In your womb, Bride of God, pure Virgin-mother, you contained God, yet
he was not circumscribed. Do not cease to intercede for us, that we may
be delivered from troubles; for we ever flee to you for refuge.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘I heard your report, Lord, and was afraid: I knew your works and I
was astounded, for the earth is full of your praise.’\]

****

Troparia.

Let the heavens rejoice, let all creation keep the feast: the Lord has
risen and appeared to all his wise Apostles.

Your power, Death, was swallowed up, when Christ died: at his Rising as
from bridal chambers the dead have come from the graves.

Why do you lament, O women? Why seek the immortal with spices? He has
risen as he said, the Angel cried to the Myrrh-bearers.

To the woman of Samaria, when she asked, Lord, you gave water, the
knowledge of your might; therefore for all ages she will never thirst as
she sings your praise.

Glory.

O Trinity beyond being, Father, Word and divine Spirit, identical in
power, together without beginning, save us all, who in faith sing your
praise.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The lawgiver saw you as a bush unburned: Daniel recognised you as a holy
mountain, O Sovereign Lady, only Virgin-mother.

****

Katavasia.

Let the prophet. ****

Ode 5. Irmos.

‘Let us arise in the early dawn, and instead of myrrh, offer praises to
the Master; and we shall see Christ, the Sun of Justice, who causes life
to dawn for all’.

****

Troparia.

Those who were held by Hades’ bonds, seeing your measureless compassion,
press forward to the light, O Christ, with joyful step, praising an
eternal Passover.

With torches in our hands let us go forth to meet Christ as he comes
from the grave, like a bridegroom, and with the festive ranks of Angels,
let us feast God’s saving Passover.

****

Of the Mother of God. Same Irmos.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif)pure Mother of God, the
assembly of the devout is enlightened by the divine, life-giving rays of
the Resurrection of your Son, and is filled with joy.

You did not open the gates of the Virgin, when You took flesh; You did
not break the seals of the grave, O King of creation. Therefore when she
saw You risen, she rejoiced.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. O Lord, our God.

By wonders you made your Apostles shine, by marvels you magnified your
Disciples, glorifying them in all the world, our Saviour, and giving
them your kingdom.

All the ends of the earth your Disciples enlightened with wonders and
teachings, as they proclaimed in divers ways, Christ Saviour, the word
of your kingdom.

We give praise to your kingdom, we offer a hymn to you who appeared on
earth for our sake and enlightened the world and called back Adam.

****

Theotokion.

Your womb became a holy table, having the heavenly bread, from which all
who eat will not die, as he the nourisher of all said, O Mother of God.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘Make the light of your commandments dawn for me, O Lord, for my
spirit rises early for You, O Christ, and hymns You: for You are our God
and to You I have run for refuge, O king of peace.’\]

****

Troparia.

Reaching your holy grave at early dawn, the Myrrh-bearers saw a shining
youth, and were amazed on learning of your divine Rising, O Christ.

Death has been slain, Hell taken prisoner, those in chains freed by the
Resurrection of Christ. Let us rejoice and clap our hands and radiantly
keep the feast.

Apostles leap for joy, Angels dance, all born of earth be glad: the Lord
has risen, corruption has been banished, grief has ceased, and Adam
dances.

O Lord, as source of life you once gave the water of forgiveness and
knowledge to a woman of Samaria when she asked: therefore we praise your
inexpressible mercies.

Glory.

We honour a three-personned Unity, consubstantial Trinity, Father, Word
and Holy Spirit, inseparable by nature, one God, Maker and Lord and
Master of all.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O Pure one, we name you gate without passage, field untilled, ark
bearing the Manna, jar, lampstand and censer of the immaterial coal.

****

Katavasia.

Let us arise in early dawn. ****

Ode 6. Irmos.

‘You went down to the deepest parts of the earth, and You shattered the
everlasting bars that held fast those that were fettered, O Christ. And
on the third day like Jonas from the whale, You arose from the tomb’.

****

Troparia.

Keeping the seals intact O Christ, You rose from the tomb, You who did
not harm the locks of the Virgin’s womb at your birth, and You have
opened to us the gates of Paradise.

O my Saviour, the living, unslain Victim, as God offering yourself
willingly to the Father, You raised up with Yourself all Adam’s race, in
rising from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)risoner of old of death and
corruption, the human race has been brought back through Him was took
flesh from your spotless womb to incorruptible and everlasting life, O
Virgin Mother of God.

He who went down, O Holy one, into your womb, dwelt there and took flesh
beyond understanding, went down into the lowest parts of the earth and
raised Adam with Himself when He rose from the tomb.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. As waves of the sea.

O Jesu, who control the ends of the earth, you went up and taught the
crowds in the temple the word of truth at the mid-point of the feast, as
John declares.

You completed the Father’s work, you confirmed your words by works, O
Saviour, performing cures and signs, making the Paralytic stand upright,
cleansing lepers and raising the dead.

The Son without beginning became a beginning, taking our nature he
became man; and in the middle of the feast He taught, saying: Run to the
unfailing source to draw life.

****

Theotokion.

As Virgin after childbirth we hymn you; as alone Virgin and Mother we
glorify you, pure Maiden, bride of God; for from you God was truly
incarnate, making us new.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘Let not the stormy waters drown me, let not the deep swallow me up:
for I have been cast into the depths of the heart of the sea of my
evils; therefore I cry to you as Jonas: May my life ascend from
corruption to you, our God.’\]

****

Troparia.

Jesu, the transgressors nailed you to a cross, and pierced you with a
lance, O Christ, and Joseph laid you for burial in a new tomb; from
which you rose with glory, raising with you all creation, which hymns
your might.

Powerfully you smashed the bolts and gates of Hell, O Master, and rose
as God, and meeting the women you said to them: Rejoice, and you sent
them to say to the Disciples: The Living has arisen, and he has appeared
giving light to the ends of the earth.

Why do you weep? Why bring spices as to a mortal, O women? Christ has
arisen, leaving the grave clothes behind empty, cried the youth who
appeared of old flashing like lightning; Go, announce the Resurrection
to his friends.

Good Lord, you are an inexhaustible stream of life, an abyss of mercy.
As you journeyed you sat down by the Well of the Oath, and cried out to
the woman of Samaria: Give me water to drink, that you may receive
streams of forgiveness.

Glory.

With the bodiless powers, I hymn in faith the Father without beginning,
and the Son equal in majesty, and the consubstantial Spirit, one
Essence, and nature and glory, and one kingship, God and Maker of all,
who holds the universe together.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Pure one, we hymn you, as only Virgin who has given birth and kept her
womb incorrupt, throne of the Lord, gate and mountain, and spiritual
lampstand, bridal chamber of God, all light, and manifest tabernacle of
glory, ark and jar and table.

****

Katavasia.

You went down. ****

Kontakion of the Samaritan Woman. Tone 8.

Coming in faith to the well, the woman of Samaria saw you, the water of
wisdom, and having been given unstintingly to drink she inherited the
kingdom from above, eternally glorious.

****

Ikos.

Let us listen to John teaching us of the holy mysteries which happened
in Samaria; how the Lord spoke with a woman, asking her for water, He
who gathers the waters to their gatherings, equal in majesty with the
Father and the Spirit; for He came seeking out his image, as eternally
glorious.

****

Synaxarion of the Menaion, then the following:

On the same day, the fifth Sunday from Easter, we celebrate the feast of
the Woman of Samaria.

****

Verses.  

Water that perishes you came to take,  
The living drew, with which you wash soul’s filth.

Through the intercessions of your Martyr Photeini, Christ our God, have
mercy on us. Amen.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

‘He who delivered the Children from the furnace, becoming man suffers as
a mortal, and through suffering he clothes the mortal with the glory of
incorruption: the only blessed and most glorious God of our fathers’.

****

Troparia.

The holy women hastened after You with sweet spices. Whom they sought
with tears as a mortal, they worshipped with joy as the living God, and
they proclaimed the mystic Passover, O Christ, to your disciples.

We feast death’s slaughter, the overthrow of Hell, the first fruits of a
new eternal life: and dancing we hymn the cause: the only blessed and
most glorious God of our fathers.

How truly holy and all-festive is this saving night, how full of light,
herald of the bright day of the resurrection, in which the timeless
Light shone bodily for all from the tomb.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)aving slain death, your Son,
O all-pure one, has to-day given to all life that endures to ages of
ages: the only blessed and highly exalted God of our fathers.

He who reigns over all creation becoming man dwelt in your womb, O full
of God’s grace, and having endured the cross and death He has risen as
God and raised us with him, for He is all powerful.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. The Chaldeans’ furnace.

The repose of all, you toiled in the flesh; the source of wonders, you
thirsted willingly; you asked for water, Jesu, promising living water.

You spoke, Lord, with a woman of Samaria, reproving the folly of the
lawless Hebrews; for she believed you to be Son of God, but they denied.

We who eat the bread of the flesh of the Lord, and drink the blood of
the Master’s side, let us, living by grace, live in newness of spirit.

****

Theotokion.

You contained in your womb the uncontainable Word, you suckled at your
breasts the nourisher of the world, you carried in your embrace the
maker of all, pure Mother of God.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘Do not hand us over for ever, for your name’s sake, do not scatter
your covenant and do not withdraw your mercy from us, O Lord the God of
our fathers, highly exalted unto the ages.’\]

****

Troparia.

O merciful Christ, willingly you were numbered among the lawless at the
moment of your divine Passion; seeing it the earth was shaken and the
rocks were rent by your all-effecting wish, O Infinite, and the dead
from time’s beginning arose.

With your soul you went down to the lower regions of Hell; bravely you
led out all the prisoners that death, the bitter tyrant, held since
time’s beginning, as they cried out to you, Christ our God: Glory to
your dread dispensation\!

Why do you seek the eternally living with the dead? He has risen, as he
said. Here, as you see, the graveclothes are empty, the tomb is empty,
the young man who appeared said to the Women: Go with haste, tell the
Apostles.

You are the water of life, the Woman of Samaria cried out to Christ;
therefore, O Word, give me, who am ever thirsty, your divine grace to
drink, that I may no longer, Lord Jesu, be mastered by the drought of
ignorance, but may proclaim your wonderful works.

Glory.

We hymn the Father and the Son and the divine Spirit, Trinity by nature
undivided, divided by persons, one united Essence, without beginning,
Maker of all and God, whom all the ranks of heaven praise.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

After your dread child-birth, holy Mother of God, you were kept a pure
Virgin; therefore all the choirs of Angels and all generations of
mankind hymn you with never silent voices as the pure place which
confined the infinite.

****

Katavasia.

The Children in the furnace. ****

Od*e* 8. Irmos.

‘This chosen and holy day is the first of Sabbaths, the Queen and Lady,
the Feast of Feasts and the Festival of Festivals on which we bless
Christ to all the ages’.

****

Troparia.

Come let us share in the new fruit of the vine, of joy divine, and in
the kingdom of Christ, on the glorious day of the Resurrection, hymning
Him as God to all the ages.

Lift your eyes around you, O Sion, and see: for behold like beacons
shedding light divine your children have come to you, from West and
North, from the Sea and from the East, blessing Christ in you to all the
ages.

Almighty Father, Word and Spirit, nature united in three Persons, beyond
all being and beyond all Godhead, into You we have been baptised and we
bless to all the ages.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-a.gif (1062 bytes)](dropcap-a.gif)s the creator came into the
world through you, O Virgin Mother of God, He tore open the womb of Hell
and gave us mortals the Resurrection; therefore we bless Him to the
ages.

Your Son, O Virgin, having overthrown the might of death, in his
resurrection, as a mighty God, has exalted us with Himself and deified
us; therefore we praise Him to the ages.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. Angels and heavens.

Come, peoples, see the one who is hymned upon a throne of glory
blasphemed by lawless peoples, and seeing, hymn the Messias who was
foretold by the prophets.

You are truly the Christ who is coming into the world, from whom are
salvation and forgiveness of ancestral faults; you are the true life of
those who believe in You.

The Wisdom of God, so it is written, came to the temple at the mid-point
of the feast and taught; for he was truly the Messias, Christ, from whom
is salvation.

****

Theotokion.

Say how you gave birth to him who shone forth eternally from the Father
and is hymned with the holy Spirit? As he knows, who alone was
well-pleased to be born of you, O Mother of God.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘You established the universe, Master, by your wisdom; and laid the
foundation of the earth, as you know how, upon the base of the waters;
therefore we all cry out in song: You works of the Lord, unceasingly
bless the Lord.’\]

****

Troparia.

You endured death by your will, only Immortal, you took hell captive,
you smashed the gates of brass, heavenly King, and released the
prisoners held there since time’s beginning, who unceasingly hymn the
might of your goodness.

You were lifted up willingly on the Cross, O Longsuffering, and the
rocks were split, the sun was quenched, the veil of the temple was rent
in two, and the earth was shaken, and Hell, the laughing stock, trembled
with fright and released all his prisoners.

You, Lord, the light that never sets and life of all, appeared to those
sitting in darkness; therefore when the just saw you, O Word, they
leaped for joy and cried aloud: You have come to free all from their
chains; we praise your might.

You sat next the source at the sixth hour, O Saviour, and granted the
Woman of Samaria living water and streams of knowledge in your great
compassion; with her we all cry out in song: You works of the Lord,
unceasingly bless the Lord.

Glory.

We praise the Father without beginning, the Son likewise without
beginning and the Holy Spirit, the three one God without confusion,
inseparable, Creator of all, identical in power, might of sovereign
freedom, and we cry out: You works of the Lord, unceasingly bless the
Lord.

Both now*.*

**Theotokion.**

Isaias was cleansed by a coal, proclaiming in advance the spiritual
coal, incarnate of you beyond understanding, O Virgin, and which burns
up all the material sins of mortals, and through pity deifies our
nature, O immaculate.

****

Katavasia.

This chosen. ****

Ode 9. Irmos.

Megalynarion:

Magnify, O my soul, Him who suffered willingly, and was buried, and
arose from the grave on the third day.

‘Shine, shine, O New Jerusalem, for the glory of the Lord has risen upon
you; dance now and be glad, O Sion, and you too rejoice, O pure Mother
of God, at the arising of Him to whom you gave birth’.

****

Troparia.

Megalynarion:

Magnify, O my soul, Christ the Giver of life, who arose from the grave
on the third day.

O your divine and beloved and sweetest voice; You have truly promised
that You will be with us unto the end of the world, O Christ; and we
faithful rejoice, having this as an anchor of hope.

****

Megalynarion:

Christ is the new Passover, the living sacrificial victim, the Lamb of
God, who takes away the sin of the world.

O great and most sacred Pascha, Christ; O Wisdom and Word and Power of
God\! Grant that we may partake of You fully in the unwaning day of your
Kingdom.

****

Of the Mother of God. The same Irmos.

![dropcap-n.gif (1140 bytes)](dropcap-n.gif)ow in harmony, O Virgin, we
faithful call you blest: Hail gate of the Lord: Hail living city: Hail
through whom to-day the light of the Resurrection from the dead of Him
who was born from you has shone for us.

Rejoice, be glad, divine gate of the light; for Jesus who set in the
tomb has dawned shining more brightly than the sun, and shedding his
rays on all the faithful, O Sovereign Lady full of God’s grace.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. Strange to mothers.

At the mid-point of the feast of the Jews You came, my Saviour, to your
temple, and you taught all: but the Jews marvelled, and said: Whence
does this man know letters, never having learned?

Pouring out gifts of healings, my Redeemer performed signs and wonders,
banishing diseases, healing the sick; but the Jews were maddened by the
multitude of his wonders.

The carnal Jew according to the flesh, thinking of what is written,
stumbles against the letter; but again collides against the Spirit of
truth; but as for us, leaving him aside, let us think things of the
Spirit.

****

Theotokion.

You contained within your womb, Virgin Mother, one of the Trinity,
Christ the Giver of life, whom all creation hymns, before whom tremble
all the thrones above; beseech him, all blessed one, that our souls may
be saved.

****

Of the Samaritan Woman. The Irmos.

\[‘He has shown strength with his arm ; he has put down the mighty from
their thrones, and exalted the humble, the God of Israel, by whom the
Dayspring from on high has visited us, and set us in the way of
peace.’\]

****

Troparia.

![dropcap-j.gif (974 bytes)](dropcap-j.gif)esus the life of all was seen
hanged willingly on a Tree; and seeing it the earth was shaken, and many
bodies of the Saints that slept visibly arose, and Hell’s prison was
shaken.

![dropcap-o.gif (1089 bytes)](dropcap-o.gif)ut of the tomb, fair as a
bridegroom from his chamber, you came, having abolished the tyranny of
death, and smashed the bolts of Hell by your divine power, and illumined
the world by the spiritual light of your Rising.

![dropcap-s.gif (1021 bytes)](dropcap-s.gif)piritual choirs now let us
all establish and let us cry: The Lord has risen; let the earth rejoice
and the heavens be glad, let the clouds rain down showers of justice for
us who radiantly celebrate and sing Christ’s praise.

![dropcap-e.gif (1057 bytes)](dropcap-e.gif)ven as he poured out
teachings richly, the Lord, source of blessings, life of all living,
cried out to the woman, ‘Grant me water to drink, that I may give you
water which dries up the sources of your sins’.

Glory.

![dropcap-p.gif (1043 bytes)](dropcap-p.gif)ure single light, yet
without parts, is the triple-sunned unity; the Father who has no
beginning, Son and Spirit, one Godhead, life and maker of all. Let us
the faithful, with the Bodiless ones, praise the Godhead, as we chant
thrice-holy songs.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

![dropcap-h.gif (1068 bytes)](dropcap-h.gif)aving become the dwelling of
the Light, O Pure one, illumine the pupils of my soul, blackened by the
many wiles of the foe, and make me worthy to see clearly with a pure
heart the Splendour that shone from you beyond understanding.

****

Katavasia.

Shine, shine. ****

Then **

Holy is the Lord, our God. ****

Exapostilarion of Pascha.

Having fallen asleep in the flesh as a mortal, O King and Lord, You rose
again on the third day, raising up Adam from corruption, and abolishing
death. O Pascha of incorruption, O salvation of the world.

****

Another, of the Woman of Samaria. Women hear.

You reached Samaria, and talking with a woman, sought water to drink, my
all-powerful Saviour, who poured out water for the Hebrews from a sharp
rock, and led her to belief in you: and now she enjoys life eternally in
heaven.

****

Of Mid-Pentecost. Same melody.

At the mid-point of the feast, Lover of mankind, you came to the temple
and said: You who are full of thirst, come to me and draw living water
welling up, through which you will all revel in delight and grace and
immortal life.

****

At Lauds were insert 8 Stichera and we sing 6 of the Resurrection and 2
of the Woman of Samaria.

Resurrection Verses. Tone 4.

All-powerful Lord, who endured Cross and death, and rose from the dead,
we glorify your Resurrection.

By your Cross, O Christ, You have freed us from the ancient curse, and
by your death You have destroyed the devil who tyrannised over our
nature, by your Rising You have filled all things with joy; therefore we
cry to You: Lord risen from the dead, glory to You\!

By your Cross, Christ Saviour, guide us to your truth, and deliver us
from the snares of the foe; risen from the dead raise us who have fallen
through sin by stretching out your hand, Lord who love mankind, at the
prayers of your saints.

Only-begotten Word of God, without being parted from the Father’s bosom,
You came on earth through love for mankind, becoming man without change,
and though impassible in your Godhead, You endured Cross and death in
the flesh; but risen from the dead You granted the human race
immortality, as You alone are all-powerful.

****

Other Stichera by Anatolios.

You accepted death in the flesh, so ensuring us immortality; and you
dwelt in a tomb, that you might free us from Hell, raising us with
yourself, having suffered as a man, but rising as God. Therefore we cry
to you: Glory to you, life-giving Lord, only lover of mankind.

The rocks were rent, O Saviour, when your Cross was fixed on Calvary;
the gate-keepers of Hell trembled when you were placed as a mortal in
the sepulchre; for you destroyed the strength of death and gave
incorruption to the dead by your Resurrection, O Saviour. Giver of life,
glory to you\!

****

Idiomel Stichera of the Samaritan Woman. Tone 3.

Verse:

Bend the bow, advance prosperously and reign; because of truth, meekness
and justice.

Let heaven and earth be radiantly glad to-day, for Christ has appeared,
incarnate as a man, that he may rescue from the curse all Adam’s race;
and through wonders he is made wonderful as he reaches Samaria; he, who
is wrapped in the waters of a cloud, came up to a woman and sought
water; and so let us the faithful all worship him, who for our sakes
willingly became poor by his compassionate counsel.

****

Tone 6.

Verse:

You have loved justice and hated iniquity, and so God, your God, has
anointed you with the oil of gladness beyond your fellows.

Thus says the Lord to the woman of Samaria: If you knew the gift of God,
and who it is who is saying to you: Give me water to drink, you would
have asked him, and he would have given you to drink, that you might
never thirst for ever; says the Lord.

Glory.

**** Same Tone.**

The spring of life’s source, Jesus our Saviour, came to the spring of
the Patriarch Jacob and sought water to drink from a woman of Samaria.
But when she objected that there was no sharing vessels by the Jews, the
wise creator diverts her with sweet words rather to ask for the eternal
water; which she accepted and proclaimed to all, saying: Come, see the
one who knows hidden things, and is God come in the flesh to save
mankind.

Both now.

You are most blessed.

****

Great Doxology and Dismissal.

Before the First Hour the Eothinon. Tone 7.

Lo, darkness and early dawn. And why, Mary, are you standing by the
grave, your mind full of darkness? Why do you seek where Jesus has been
laid? But see the disciples running together, see how they have realised
the Resurrection from the grave clothes and the napkin, and have
remembered the Scripture concerning this. With whom and through whom we
too have believed and sing your praise O Christ, the Giver of Life.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

