\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone3.md) \] \[ Saturday Evening \]
\[ [Sunday Midnight](sun3nc.md) \] \[ [Sunday Matins](sun3mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers2.md) \]

 

PERIOD OF TONE 3

**ON SATURDAY EVENING**

AT SMALL VESPERS
----------------

**At** Lord, I have cried… **we insert 4 Stichera, and sing the 3
Resurrection Stichera from the Oktoichos, doubling the 1st.** Glory…,
Both now… **and the following Theotokion, the Dogmatic.**

Tone 3.

Greatest wonder: a Virgin gives birth, and that which was born is God
before the ages. Manifest the giving birth, that which was accomplished
was beyond nature. O fearsome Mystery! What was apprehended remains
ineffable, and that which was contemplated is not understood. Blessed
are you, most pure Maiden, daughter of Adam the earthborn, and
manifested as Mother of God Most High. Implore him that our souls may be
saved.

****

Then

O Joyful Light… **and the Prokeimenon** The Lord is King… **with its
verses. After** Grant, Lord… **etc., we sing the first Resurrection
Sticheron of the Aposticha and the following Prosomia of the Mother of
God.**

Tone 3.

Verse:

** I shall remember your name in every generation and generation.

Pure Virgin, we know you to be the spiritual Ark that bears the Tables
written by God, for us the Lawgiver and Creator. Intercede with him that
our souls may be saved.

****

Verse:

** Listen, daughter, and see, and incline your ear; and forget your
people and your father’s house.

God the Word, by nature beyond contemplation, who dwelt in your womb and
took on flesh, revealed you to be Heaven upon earth, pure Virgin. And
you, who knew not wedlock, rain down upon all an immortal dew.

****

Verse:

The rich among the people of the land will entreat your favour.

By your intercessions we have gained salvation, because through them, O
Virgin, we ever escape from dangers and the squall of temptations. And
so we ask, do not cease to intercede for us, that our souls may be
saved.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion**.

Through you, Mary most pure, we know refashioning and a second life for
human nature: the Creator of creation who was kneaded in your womb and
who raised us up from Hades and form death and has granted us eternal
life to cry out to you, Ever-virgin; ‘Hail, who joined together things
below with those of heaven. Hail, the hope of all the ends of the earth,
protection and assistance. Hail, who by the Resurrection of your Son
make radiant the universe and grant the world his great mercy’.

Now Master,

**Trisagion etc. and the Resurrection Apolytikion.**

And the Dismissal.

AT GREAT VESPERS

****

After the Opening Psalm and the first Kathisma of the Psalter, a

**t Lord I have cried…,** **we insert 10 Stichera, and we sing 7
Resurrection Stichera and 3 of the Saint of the day, or 4 and 6 if the
Saint is ‘feasted’.**

Resurrection Stichera. Tone 3.

By your Cross, Christ Saviour, death’s might has been abolished, the
devil’s deception destroyed, while the human race, saved by faith, each
evening offers you its hymn.

By your Resurrection, Lord, the universe has been filled with light and
Paradise has been opened again, while all creation as it sings your
praise, each evening offers you its hymn.

I glorify the power of the Father and the Son, and I praise the
authority of the Holy Spirit, undivided, uncreated Godhead,
consubstantial Trinity, that reigns from age to age.

****

Other Stichera, by Anatolios.

We worship your precious Cross, O Christ, and we praise and glorify your
Resurrection, for by your stripes we have all been healed.

We praise the Saviour who took flesh from the Virgin; for he was
crucified for us and rose on the third day, granting us his great mercy.

Going down to those in Hell, Christ proclaimed the good tidings, saying,
‘Be of good courage; now have I conquered! I am the Resurrection; I will
bring you up, abolishing the gates of death’.

We who stand unworthily in your most pure house sing an evening hymn, as
we cry out of the depths, ‘Christ God, who enlightened the world by your
Resurrection on the third day, deliver your people from the hand of your
foes, O Lover of mankind’.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

How should we not marvel at your Offspring, who is both God and man,
all-honoured one? For without knowing man, O all-blameless, you gave
birth in the flesh to a Son without father, begotten from the Father
before the ages without mother, in no way undergoing change, or mixture
or separation, but preserving intact the identity of either nature.
Therefore, Sovereign Lady, Virgin Mother, implore him that the souls may
be saved of those who with right belief acknowledge you as Mother of
God.

****

After the Entrance and

O Joyful Light…, **the designated Monk makes a metania to the Superior
and sings the Prokeimenon of the day.**

The Lord is King: \* he has robed himself in majesty

****

Verse 1:

The Lord has robed and girded himself with power. ****

Verse 2:

** He has made the world firm; it will not be shaken. ****

Then the usual Litany,

Grant Lord… **etc. and after the Ekphonesis we sing the idiomel
Sticheron of the Saint of the Monastery as we process into the Narthex.
After the usual prayers we return to the Church singing the**

Resurrection Aposticha. Tone 3.

By your passion, O Christ, you darkened the sun, and by the light of
your Resurrection you made the whole universe radiant. Accept our
evening hymn, O Lover of humankind.

****

In Alphabetical Order.

Verse 1:

The Lord is King: he has robed himself in majesty. The Lord has robed
and girded himself with power. ****

G

racious Lord, your Rising that received life has enlightened the world,
and recalled your own fashioning which had become corrupt. And so,
delivered from Adam’s curse, we cry, ‘All-powerful Lord, glory to you!’
****

Verse 2:

** He has made the world firm; it will not be shaken. ****

H

owbeit that as God you are unchanging, yet by suffering in the flesh you
changed. Creation, unable to bear seeing you hanging on a cross, was
shaken with fear, and it groaned as it sang the praise of your
long-suffering; but having descended into Hell, you arose on the third
day, granting life to the world and your great mercy. ****

Verse 3:

** Holiness befits your house, O Lord, to length of days. ****

I

n order to ransom our race from death, O Christ, you underwent death;
and rising on the third day from the dead you raised with yourself those
who acknowledged you as God, and you enlightened the world. Lord, glory
to you!

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

By the Father’s will, without seed you conceived from the divine Spirit
the Son of God, who from before the ages is from the Father without
mother. But you gave birth in the flesh and suckled as a babe him who
for our sake had come from you without father. Therefore do not cease to
intercede that our souls may be delivered from dangers.

****

Apolytikion.

Let everything in heaven rejoice, let everything on earth be glad, for
the Lord has shown strength with his arm; by death he has trampled on
death; he has become the first-born of the dead; from the bowels of
Hades he has delivered us; and granted the world his great mercy.

****

Theotokion.

Virgin Mother of God, we praise you as the means of the salvation of our
race; for your Son and our God, who through the Cross accepted suffering
in the flesh he had taken from you, has redeemed us from corruption, for
he loves mankind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
