\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone5.md) \] \[ Saturday Evening \]
\[ [Sunday Midnight](sun5nc.md) \] \[ [Sunday Morning](sun5mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers4.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins5.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins PDF](Thursday%20Matins%20PDF.md) \]

PERIOD OF TONE 5

**ON SATURDAY EVENING**

AT SMALL VESPERS
----------------

****

At

Lord, I have cried **we insert 4 Stichera, and sing 3 Resurrection
Stichera from the Oktoichos, doubling the 1st.**

Glory. Both now.

**Dogmatic Theotokion. Tone 5.**

Let us honour the Maiden, revered and worthy of God, in honour higher
than the Cherubim, for the Creator of all things, when he wished to
become man, made his dwelling ineffably in her. O strange deeds and
wondrous mysteries! Who would not be amazed on hearing this, that God
becomes man? There was no change in him. He passed through the gates of
virginity and no diminution was left in her, as the Prophet says; No man
will ever pass through it, except the Lord, the God of Israel, who has
great mercy.

****

Aposticha. Prosomia of the Mother of God.\
Hail, of ascetic struggles.

Verse:

I shall remember your name in every generation and generation.

My hands I stretch out towards you, my sordid lips I open in
supplication, I bend the knee of my heart and in spirit I now touch your
most pure feet, pure Virgin, and I fall before you; Heal my pains and,
in your loving-kindness, treat my many and incurable wounds. Deliver me
from seen and unseen foes. Lighten the burden of my sloth, that I may
praise and glorify you through whom the world has found God’s great
mercy.

****

Verse:

Listen, daughter, and see, and incline your ear; and forget your people
and your father’s house.

Hail, All-blameless Virgin, beyond explanation who conceived and gave
birth in the flesh to the Son of God, who from your blood truly took
that which was ours, with a soul that was rational and possessed free
will; for, having put on Adam without defect, he refashioned and saved
mankind. Therefore Christ is proclaimed to us as being in two natures,
showing in himself the activity of them both. Implore him that his great
mercy be given to our souls.

****

Verse:

The rich among the people of the land will entreat your favour.

Hail, beauty of Jacob, whom God chose and loved; door of the saved,
flame-bearing tongs, abolition of the curse, all-blessed Maiden, womb
that contained God, righting of the fallen, holier than the Cherubim,
higher than creation, sight hard to look upon, strangest report, saying
that cannot be expressed, chariot of the Word, cloud from which dawned
the Sun that sheds his light even on me and grants to those in darkness
his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The prophecies concerning you have been fulfilled, pure Virgin; for one
of the Prophets foretold you as the Gate in Eden facing towards the east
through which none had passed, except your Creator and that of all the
world. Another saw you as a Bush aflame with fire, because in you there
dwelt the fire of the Godhead and you remained unburned. Another as a
holy Mountain from which was hewn without human hand a cornerstone and
it crushed the image of the spiritual Nabuchodonosor. Truly great and
wondrous is the mystery that is in you, Mother of God! Therefore we
glorify you, for through you has come the salvation of our souls.

****

Resurrection Apolytikion and Dismissal.

AT GREAT VESPERS

****

After the Opening Psalm and the first Kathisma of the Psalter, at

Lord I have cried, **we insert 10 Stichera, and we sing 7 Resurrection
Stichera and 3 from the Menaion.**

Resurrection Stichera. Tone 5.

By your precious Cross, O Christ, you have shamed the devil, and by your
Resurrection you have blunted the goad of sin, and you have saved us
from the gates of death: we glorify you, O Only-begotten.

He who gives the Resurrection to the human race, was led as a sheep to
the slaughter; all the princes of Hell trembled before him and the gates
of pain were lifted up; for Christ the King of glory had come in, saying
to those in bondage: Come forth! and to those in darkness: Reveal
yourselves!

O great marvel! Having suffered in the flesh through love for mankind,
the Creator of things invisible, the immortal has risen. Come families
of nations, let us worship him; for delivered from error by his
compassion, we have learned to hymn one God in three Persons.

****

Other Verses by Anatolios.

We offer you our evening worship, O Light that knows no evening, who at
the end of the ages, as in a glass, shone through the flesh on the
world, and descended as far as Hell, abolished the darkness there and
showed the nations the light of the Resurrection; O Lord, Giver of
light, glory to you!

Let us glorify Christ the author of our salvation; for by his rising
from the dead, the world has been saved from error; the choir of Angels
rejoices, the error of demons flees, fallen Adam arises, the devil has
been overthrown.

O Lord, our Saviour, who despoiled Hell and trampled on death; who
enlightened the world by the precious Cross, have mercy upon us.

The members of the guard were instructed by the lawless: Conceal
Christ’s Resurrection and take money and say that while we asleep the
corpse was stolen from the grave. Who ever saw, who ever heard of a
stolen corpse? Especially one anointed and naked, and even leaving its
grave-clothes in the tomb? Do not be deceived, O Jews, learn the sayings
of the Prophets, and know that he is truly the Redeemer of the world and
All-powerful.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

In the Red Sea was once depicted an image of the Bride who knew not
wedlock. There Moses the parter of the water, here Gabriel the servant
of the marvel; then Israel marched dry shod through the deep, but now
the Virgin has given birth to Christ without seed; the sea after
Israel’s passage remained untrodden; the Blameless one after bearing
Emmanuel remained incorrupt. O God, who exists and pre-exists, and
appeared as man, have mercy on us.

****

Entrance,

O Joyful Light, **and the Prokeimenon of the day.**

Resurrection Stichera of the Aposticha

**.**

With sounds of song we magnify you, O Christ, the Saviour incarnate, yet
not parted from heaven, for you accepted cross and death for the sake of
our race, for you are the Lord who loves mankind. When you had despoiled
the gates of Hades, you rose on the third day and saved our souls.

****

Alphabetical.

Verse 1:

The Lord is King: he has robed himself in majesty. The Lord has robed
and girded himself with power.

When your side was pierced, O Giver of life, you poured out streams of
forgiveness, of life and salvation for all; you accepted death in the
flesh, so giving us immortality; by dwelling in a grave you freed us,
raising us with yourself as God in glory; and so we cry out to you: O
Lord, Lover of mankind, glory to you!

****

Verse 2:

He has made the world firm; it will not be shaken.

Strange your crucifixion and your descent into Hades, O Lover of
mankind; for having despoiled it and raised with yourself as God in
glory those who were prisoners, you opened Paradise and bade it welcome
them; so give us too, who glorify your Rising on the third day,
forgiveness of sins, granting us to be inhabitants of Paradise, as you
alone are compassionate.

****

Verse 3:

Holiness befits your house, O Lord, to length of days.

O Lover of mankind, who for ours sakes accepted the passion in the
flesh, and rose from the dead on the third day, heal the passions of our
flesh, raise us from grievous offences, and save us.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

You are temple and gate, palace and throne of the King, All-honoured
Virgin; through you Christ the Lord, my redeemer, appeared to those who
sat in darkness, for he is the Sun of justice, who wishes to enlighten
those whom he fashioned in his own image with his own hand. Therefore
All-praised one, as you have a mother’s boldness towards him, intercede
unceasingly that our souls be saved.

****

Resurrection Apolytikion.

Let us believers praise and worship the Word who like the with Father
and with Spirit is without beginning, born from a Virgin for our
salvation; for he was well pleased to ascend the Cross in the flesh and
undergo death, and to raise those who had died, by his glorious
Resurrection.

****

Theotokion.

Hail gate of the Lord, though which none may pass; hail wall and
protection of those who flee to you; hail haven without storms, and who
did not know wedlock, who bore in the flesh your Maker and God, do not
cease to intercede for those who praise and worship your Offspring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
