\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](horologion.md) \]
\[ [Saints of the Month](saintsof.md) \]
\[ [Vespers for Sundays and Feasts](vespers.md) \]
\[ [Matins for Sundays and Feasts](mat-sun.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Matins](weekday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Midnight Office](midnight_office.md) \]
\[ Saturday Midnight Office \]
\[ [Sunday Midnight Office](sunday_midnight_office.md) \]
\[ [Lesser Hours](lesser_hours.md) \]
\[ [Small Compline](small_compline.md) \]
\[ [Lenten Offices](lenten_offices.md) \]
\[ [Little Paraklesis](lit-parak.md) \]

## SATURDAY MIDNIGHT OFFICE

****

The Office begins as on ordinary weekdays, but instead of Psalm 118
(Kathisma 17) we say Psalms 64-69 (Kathisma 9).

After the

I believe ** **and the Trisagion etc., we say the following Troparia.**

Tone 2.

Uncreated nature, maker of all things, open our lips that we may declare
your praise as we cry: Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O God. Through the
Mother of God have mercy on us.

Glory.

We who are on earth, imitating the Powers above, offer you, O Good one,
a hymn of victory: Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O God. Through the Mother
of God have mercy on us.

Both now.

You have roused me, Lord, from my bed and from sleep, enlighten my mind
and open my heart and my lips, to sing your praise, O Holy Trinity:
Holy, Holy, Holy are you, O God. Through the Mother of God have mercy on
us.

****

Then as on ordinary weekdays, except that instead of the two Prayers of
Saint Basil we say this

****

Prayer of Saint Efstratios

I magnify you greatly, O Lord, because you have looked upon my
lowliness, and have not hemmed me into the hands of enemies, but have
saved my soul from constraints. And now, Master, let your hand protect
me, and your mercy come upon me, for my soul has been troubled and is
greatly afflicted at its departure from this wretched and soiled body of
mine. May the evil plan of the adversary never confront and obstruct it,
because of the many sins committed by me in this life in knowledge and
in ignorance. Be merciful to me, Master, and never let my soul see the
dark and gloomy sight of the evil demons; but may your bright and
shining Angels receive it. Give glory to your holy name, and bring me by
your power to your divine judgement seat. When I am judged, let not the
hand of the ruler of this world seize me to cast me, sinner that I am,
into the depths of Hell; but stand by me and be for me a saviour and a
helper. Have mercy, Lord, on my soul, stained with the passions of life,
and receive it pure through repentance and confession; for you are
blessed to the ages of ages. Amen.

****

Then the rest of the Office as on ordinary weekdays.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

