\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone4.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat4ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun4nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins and Liturgy](sun4mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins4.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins1.md) \] \[ Saturday Matins \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers3.md) \]

# 

ON SATURDAY MORNING

## 

AT matins

****

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of the Martyrs.

Tone 4. Come speedily to help.

Armed with the Cross your Champions conquered the devices of the enemy,
source of evil, O Christ our God: they shone like beacons, guiding
mortals, they grant healings to those who ask in faith. At their
intercessions save our souls.

**Verse: ** God is wonderful in his saints, the God of Israel.**

Clothed as in purple and fine linen with the blood of your Martyrs
throughout the world, your Church cries out to you through them, Christ
God: Send down your pity on your people, grant peace to your
commonwealth, and to our souls your great mercy.

****

Verse:

Their souls will dwell among good things.

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained crowns of incorruption
from you our God; for with your strength they destroyed tyrants, and
vanquished the feeble insolence of demons. At their prayers, O Christ
God, save our souls.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The mystery hidden from all eternity, and unknown to Angels has been
revealed to those on earth through you, O Mother of God: God being made
flesh in a union without confusion, and willingly accepting the Cross
for us, through which he raised the first-formed man, and saved our
souls from death.

****

After Psalm 118, Kathisma of the Martyrs.

Today the armies of the Angels are present in memory of the Champions to
enlighten the minds of the faithful and to make the whole world bright
with grace. Besought by them, O God, grant our souls your great mercy.

****

Verse:

** Many are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord will deliver
them from them all. ****

Others, of the Dead.

  
Come speedily to help.

As you are all-powerful and alone immortal, give rest, O Lord, to the
souls which you have translated from temporary things; remit, forgive
what they have done, O full of pity; have mercy, O Merciful, on the
works of your hands; at the prayers of the Mother of God, O only Lover
of mankind.

****

Verse:

** Blessed are those that you have chosen and taken; they will dwell in
your courts.

Having passed through this temporary life, those who have lived
faithfully have crossed over to you, compassionate Lord; set them in the
place of pardon, stand them at your right hand on the day of judgement,
overlooking the things by which they offended.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion. Same.**

Pure Virgin Bride of God; you have been declared Mercy Seat of the
faithful, their common refuge and fervent mediation, therefore appear
now as mediatrix also for those who have passed over in faith, and a
gate of salvation leading to the wide plain of Paradise.

****

Canon to the Saints. The acrostic is:

  
Radiantly I praise the good friends of God. Joseph. ****

Ode 1. Irmos.

Mighty captains third in rank, the third part of the soul, drown in a
deep of dispassion, I beg, O Born of a Virgin, that as on a timbrel I
may by putting the body to death sing you a song of victory.

****

Troparia.

The holy Church ever shines with the contests of the shining Athletes of
the Lord, and it honours and glorifies Christ, the Sun who blazed out
from the Virgin and dimmed the darkness of deception.

Let us faithfully praise the Hierarchs of Christ, who were good
shepherds of his people, his own possession, and let us give resplendent
praise to the whole gathering of those who have lived holy lives and in
spirit put to death the pleasures of the body.

Strength from God was given to Women who by ascetic struggle and valiant
contest trampled on the foe by grace. At their prayers, Lord, and those
of your holy Prophets send down to all your mercies

****

Of the Dead

Justify, O Christ, your servants, whom in your just providence you taken
over from this corruptible way of life to life without corruption, and
count them worthy to dance with all the Just, disregarding their
offences.

****

Theotokion

Delivering us from the ancient condemnation, the Son of God was
well-pleased, Pure Virgin, to become your Son also. We therefore,
through him adopted as sons, bless the heavenly Father as we sing your
praise.

****

Another, of those Fallen Asleep, of which the acrostic is:

  
A fourth Canon remembering the end ****

Irmos.

Through the Red Sea’s deep.

Grasping the right hand of your servants, O Christ, guide them to
eternal life, to the contemplation of your beauty, entreated by the
Martyrs, champions of truth.

Count worthy of your ineffable and blessed glory, O Christ, those who
have passed over to you, leaving aside their faults and justifying them
by grace and the shedding of your Blood.

By your life-bearing death you slew the death bringer, Christ God, who
breathe life into the dead. Give rest now also to your faithful
servants, whom you have taken.

****

Cross-Theotokion

As God your Son was lovely with surpassing beauty; but incarnate from
you, O Virgin, and hanged upon the Tree he had no beauty as he accepted
death on behalf of all.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

He weakened the bow of the powerful, and the weak girded themselves with
power; therefore my heart is established in the Lord.

****

Troparia

Sacrificed and slain like lambs the triumphant Martyrs were offered to
the Lamb and Word of God who was sacrificed for the redemption of all.

The sacred Initiators, called the mouth of God, brought in the worthy
from among the unworthy and made then resplendent by their sacred
teachings.

The company of holy ones through self-mastery has found from God delight
without cost, delighting in contemplation and divine ascents.

****

Of the Dead

At the intercessions of all your Saints give rest to all those that you
have translated in faith, overlooking all the faults committed by them
in life.

****

Theotokion

Let us offer praise to God, who was born of his own will from the Virgin
and who with choirs of Women united the choirs of Angels.

****

For the Departed. Another Irmos.

  
Let us not boast.

Having conquered the error of idols, the Martyrs now implore their
Master and God to grant divine rest to those who have died before us.

Be well pleased, Master, for your servants, whom you have translated, to
step across the whirling sword to and to obtain fitting participation in
the tree of life.

Count your servants worthy to make their dwelling in the Paradise of
delight, where the pure sound of those who feast resounds, and grant
them forgiveness of offences.

****

Theotokion

You joined virginity to your divine giving birth, O All-pure; for you
bore beyond explanation the Creator of the universe, by whose will all
things exist.

****

Ode 4. Irmos

He who sits in glory on the throne of the Godhead, Jesus, the One above
all godhead, came on a light cloud with his unsullied palm and saved
those who cry: Glory, O Christ, to your power\!

****

Troparia

The most sacred company of Martyrs was glorified when with their own
songs they had glorified the Lord who is glorified by all the Angels,
and they intercede that we may be delivered from every tribulation.

Godlike Hierarchs, as your minds shone with the brightness of immaterial
light, you abolished the night godlessness, and with unerring guidance
you guided to the light Christ’s flock chosen by God.

The numerous community of Ascetics has been made fair, the assembly of
godlike Women has been magnified, the holy company of the Prophets has
been honoured, united rejoicing with the companies of the Angels.

****

Of the Dead

Named fellow citizens of the Angels, O Martyrs, for all who have fallen
asleep entreat pardon, the dwelling of God’s Paradise and complete
redemption of offences.

****

Theotokion

The One who kept you a blameless Virgin after bearing child has
glorified all the virgins who stand around you. With them unceasingly
implore that our souls may be saved from every tribulation and disaster.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. Another.

  
Seeing you, the Sun.

Shown forth like beacons the Martyrs make bright the heaven of the
Church, and they ask the Saviour Christ to grant forgiveness to those
who sleep.

With your Cross as a rod of power your servants passed through the sea
of the world. Plant them now on your mountain, Lord, on which you
wrought sanctification.

As you are compassionate, be well pleased, Master, for your servants,
whom you have chosen and taken, to dwell in your tabernacles, so truly
beloved, where the spirits of the Righteous are found.

****

Theotokion

The Immortal, who has authority over the dead and the living, having
taken a body as man from you, O Mother of God, underwent death in the
flesh, abolishing the power of death.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

You, Lord, my light, came into the world, a holy light turning from the
darkness of ignorance those who sing your praise in faith.

****

Troparia

Lifted up on crosses, broken on wheels, hacked limb from limb, God’s
valiant Champions appeared indivisible.

As beacons of the faithful, O Hierarchs, you brought to the Shepherd and
Lamb those whom you had been entrusted to shepherd with holiness.

The holy Ascetics, separated from worldly tumults, made their hearts
peaceful from passions became children of the God of all.

****

Of the Dead

The company of inspired Prophets and Women having served the Lord, asks
rest for those who have fallen asleep before us.

****

Theotokion

The Lord having dwelt in you, all pure Virgin, made mortals into
dwelling places of his glory.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. The same.

You glorified the Martyrs, witnesses to your dominion, Lord; through
them, as you are compassionate, also give rest to those who have passed
over to you.

Grant, O most merciful, to those who have fallen asleep before us life
without sorrow, joy with delight, happiness with end.

O alone Loving One and source of loving kindness, give rest to those who
have ended their life in faith and knowledge of you.

****

Theotokion

Mother of God, through whom the ineffable and unapproachable beauty
dawned for those in darkness, we sing your praise and with love call you
blessed.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

I entered the depths of the sea, and a storm of many sins drowned me;
but as God lead my life back from corruption, as you love mankind.

****

Troparia

Most honoured Martyrs, all-wisely rolled like stones upon the earth you
overthrew the whole edifice of impiety and became temples of God.

All you Hierarchs and Ascetics, who in Christ led a flock, you saved all
under your control from violent control; for this you are called
blessed.

The multitudes of Women, following the sayings of the Prophets, by
discipline and struggle ministered to God the Word who shone forth from
a Woman who was Virgin.

****

Of the Dead

O Christ, the Life of all who have died, settle in the light of your
countenance all those who have gone from us in faith to you the Creator.

****

Theotokion

With mouth and tongue and heart I confess you, O Maiden, to be the pure
Mother of our God. But by your mediation deliver me from eternal
condemnation.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. Another.

  
I will sacrifice to you.

The whirling sword, seeing the lance that pierced your divine side, O
Saviour, withdrew from your servants at the prayers of your Champions.

Hanged on a tree you opened Paradise; plant in it then those who have
passed over in faith, my Saviour, as you as compassionate, and make them
partakers of your glory.

Count those who through death devoutly attend on you, their Master,
worthy to pluck the meadows of delight, and number them with your
Righteous ones from every age.

****

Theotokion

The Word, invisible as God, having taken a body from an unwedded virgin
Maiden, was made visible and by his own death abolished death.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

Abraham’s Children once in Babylon trampled down the flame of a furnace,
and as they sang their hymn they chanted, Blessed is the God of our
Fathers.

In gladness of soul let us with one accord praise the hallowed vessels
of the Master Christ, the ramparts of the Church, the Martyrs of the
Lord.

The Hierarchs of Christ and the godly choir of all the Saints rejoice
with the Powers on high. At their prayers, O Saviour, save your flock.

The Women who made fair endurance shine out through holiness and
struggle and by faith practised the ascetic life in obedience destroyed
the one who wounded Eve.

****

Of the Dead

Merciful Lord, who captured Hades and trampled on death by your death,
give rest to those you have translated in faith and make then
inhabitants of Paradise.

****

Theotokion

The Lawgiver of old, as he watched the flame not burning up the Bush,
was being taught the image of your child-bearing, O only Mother of God,
ever blessed.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. Another.

  
In the Persian furnace.

As you accepted the endurance, the courage and all the blood of the
Martyrs as a ransom for those who have passed over in true religion, O
Saviour, give them rest as you are merciful and easily placated

Number with the first-born and the righteous, O Saviour, the souls of
your servants who have passed over to you, and count them worthy to
delight unceasingly in you, the Master of all things.

As God be well pleased, O Word of God, that those whom you have taken
may meet you in the clouds with joy, boldness and bright radiance, as
you are merciful and full of mercy.

**Theotokion**

Blessed Mother of God, Mother and Virgin, hail\! For through you the
destruction of death has truly come to pass, while life without sorrow
has been granted to all the dead.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

Almighty Redeemer of the universe, in your condescension you bedewed the
devout Youths in the midst of the flame, and taught them to sing: All
you his works, bless, praise the Lord.

****

Troparia

Hierarchs, Prophets and Martyrs having accomplished their fight have
obtained a most holy dwelling with the Angels. With them they pardon and
mercy for us all.

Made resplendent by the Spirit the Ascetics dispelled the darkness of
the demons. With them Priest-martyrs, Hierarchs and Prophets with the
Righteous from every age rejoice.

He who in folly once boasted that he would wipe out the land and sea is
always trampled on by the ascetic discipline and struggle of Women
resplendent with the rays of the Spirit.

****

Of the Dead

O Christ, we entreat you for all who have fallen asleep in faith. As you
are compassionate number them with the choirs of the saved as they cry
out: Bless, praise the Lord.

****

Theotokion

make me worthy of your compassion, all-pure Mother of God, who bore the
compassionate Word of God, and save me as I cry: All you his works,
bless, praise the Lord.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. Another.

  
Stretching out his hands.

Accepting the supplications of the Martyrs and their compassion for
their fellow beings, give rest, Master, to the souls of those who have
fallen asleep in your faith, overlooking their sins as they cry out to
you: All you works of the Lord, bless the Lord.

Dead you were reckoned with transgressors; for the dead you became a
source of immortal life. Therefore, Master, count worthy to obtain your
Kingdom those who have passed over in hope of resurrection as they cry
out to you: All you his works, praise the Lord.

O Saviour, in truth the everflowing and inexhaustible spring, graciously
receive your servants who met their end and left behind the life that is
subject to decay as they cry out to you: All you his works, praise the
Lord.

****

Theotokion

You alone appeared on earth as Virgin without spot and Mother without
corruption; for you gave birth to God, Sovereign Lady, beyond reason and
thought, and you became the source of eternal life for mortals.
Therefore we all bless you, Mary Bride of God.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

Eve by the sickness of disobedience gave entrance to the curse; but you,
Virgin Mother of God, by the offshoot of your child-bearing made
blessing flower for the world; therefore we all magnify you.

****

Troparia

Having seen the gifts of God and gained the rewards of their mighty
toils, the Martyrs rejoice as they magnify Christ who truly magnified
them and declared them victors.

As guides in matters sacred you led your people, Hierarchs, heralds of
God; as men made more resplendent than the sun, Venerable Ascetics, you
shone on the faithful, shedding your rays by examples of mighty works.

Together with Priest-martyrs, Martyrs and Prophets let us call blessed
all Venerable Ascetics, Righteous men and Women who gained gloriously
the highest prize, as we cry out, O Christ: At their intercessions
deliver our souls from Hell.

****

Of the Dead

Of that joy of which the Saints who served you well have been counted
worthy, count worthy, O Christ, those who have passed over in faith in
you, overlooking their sins because of your rich mercy.

****

Theotokion

You appeared higher than the Cherubim on high, O All-blameless, for you
carried the One who holds the universe in being. Make my mind higher
than the passions of the flesh, empowering me to do the Master’s will.

****

For those Fallen Asleep. The same.

You have given to the true Athletes and Martyrs freedom of speech to
entreat you; therefore, Lord, through them give to those fallen asleep
in faith divine redemption, granting them the grace to dwell in the
place of your holy tabernacle.

At your creative behest you work all things expediently having authority
over the living and lordship of the dead as you are compassionate;
settle your servants, whom you have translated, by waters of rest.

As you are by nature loving, rich in mercy and goodness, deliver from
exterior darkness those who have invoked your name, justifying them
through faith and making them resplendent by grace as you love mankind.

****

Theotokion

The Prophets proclaimed beforehand the symbols of your birthgiving, All
blameless, each in different wonderfully ways fitting titles to you; for
you have given birth to Life for those in Hades that abolished the might
of death.

****

Aposticha of Lauds. Of the Martyrs.

O Holy Martyrs, you became companions of the Angels, having bravely
proclaimed Christ in the stadium; for you abandoned all the world’s
pleasures as unreal, but held to the faith as a sure anchor; therefore
driving away error you became a source of gifts of healings for the
faithful, as you ceaselessly intercede for our souls.

How should we not marvel at your struggles, holy Martyrs? for while
enclosed in the body you wounded bodiless foes; the threats of tyrants
did not affright you, nor the assaults of tortures crush you; truly
worthily you have been glorified in Christ’s presence, and you ask for
our souls his great mercy.

Precious is the death of your Saints, O Lord: for broken by sword, fire
and cold, they shed their blood, having their hope in you that they
would receive the reward of their labour. They endured and received from
you, O Saviour, your great mercy.

****

Of the Dead.

In your repose where all the saints find rest, give rest, O Lord, to the
souls of your servants, for you alone are immortal.

Glory.

**Of the Dead.**

Where is the attraction of the world? Where the delusion of the
temporary? Where is gold, where silver? Where the throng and hubbub of
servants? All dust, all ashes, all shadow. But come, let us cry out to
the immortal King: O Lord, grant your eternal good things to him who has
passed from us, giving him rest in the happiness which does not age.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O only pure and spotless Virgin, who bore God without seed, intercede
that our souls may be saved.

****

If

Alleluia **is sung we say the above Verses of the Martyrs at Lauds; but
at the Aposticha the following Prosomia, composed by Theophanes.**

Prosomia. Tone 4.  

You have given as a sign.

Truly most terrible is the mystery of death\! How violently the soul is
separated from the body; the bond of nature is severed by God’s will
from the harmony and unity. Therefore we implore you: Give rest to those
who have passed over in the tents of your righteous ones, O Giver of
life who love mankind.

****

Verse:

** Blessed are those whom you have chosen and taken.

The death of those who believe has been declared a sleep, for you, the
Master of all, were placed in a grave abolished the might of death and
destroyed his long-enduring dominion. Therefore we implore you:
Establish those who have passed over in the tents of your Saints, in
your pure mansions.

****

Verse:

** Their souls will dwell among good things.

You have become for us justice, sanctification and redemption of our
souls; for you brought us, justified and redeemed, to the Father, taking
on yourself on our behalf the penalty we owed. And now we entreat you:
Give rest in joy and radiance, O Saviour and Benefactor, to those who
have passed over.

****

Verse:

** And their memorial is from generation to generation.

The human race has been recalled from corruption to incorruption that
cannot be destroyed, washed by the Blood that was emptied from your
side, O Saviour, with which you washed away our transgression and that
of our forebears. Therefore, O Lover of mankind, now count your servants
who have passed from temporary things worthy of the splendour of heaven.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Following the sayings of those inspired by God, O spotless Virgin, we
believe you to be Mother of God. For in ways past understanding you gave
birth to God made flesh, who redeemed us, who were enslaved by our
offences. Implore him now, O all-pure, to shine with his own radiance on
your servants who have passed over.

## 

at the liturgy

****

The Beatitudes

Through a tree Adam became an exile from Paradise, but through the tree
of the Cross the Thief dwelt in paradise; the one by tasting rejected
the commandment of his maker, the other, crucified with him, confessed
the hidden God, crying: Remember me in your kingdom.

O Holy Martyrs, fired with the love of Christ you quenched the fiery
torch of impiety with the dew of your struggles, and you appeared as
lamps of the Church with many lights, driving away by grace the darkness
of the diseases and tribulations of our souls; therefore as is fitting
we all honour you.

Sacred High priests, the company of inspired Prophets, choirs of
Ascetics and the assembly of holy Women, served God and were glorified
by virtuous deeds. Let us call them blessed, as we implore that at their
prayers we may reach eternal glory and splendour.

Where your light shines, where choirs of Angels dwell, whence sighing
and grief have fled establish your servants who have died before us and
left this life of many sorrows, that they may hymn your ineffable
goodness, O Saviour, overlooking the offences which they committed.

Glory.

O undivided Trinity, wholly united in Father, Son and Spirit, yet not
confounded in properties, three-personned Unity, give rest to those who
have died with faith in you; at the prayers of your Martyrs, Saints and
honoured Prophets granting them pardon and forgiveness.

Both now.

**Theotokion.**

The Word, whom the Father begot before the Morning Star, you conceived
in your womb and bore in flesh when he became perfect man, acknowledged
in two activities and wills, O Most Pure; implore him then to have pity
as Creator and Lord on us who sing your praise, Maiden, Bride of God.

**END OF THE FOURTH TONE.**

A festal and a dancing tone, you bear  
By musical opinion a fourth boast.  
Dancers you welcome, and you form them too,  
To voices give the prize, on cymbals beat.  
You, the fourth Tone, as filled with melodies,  
The serried lines of dancers eulogise.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

