\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \] \[ 1 September Vespers \]
\[ [1 September Matins & Liturgy](sep01ml.md) \]
\[ [5 September](05sep.md) \] \[ [6 September](6_september.md) \]
\[ [7 September](07sep.md) \] \[ [13 September](13sep.md) \]
\[ [23 September](23sept.md) \] \[ [24 September](24sept.md) \]
\[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

# 

SEPTEMBER

****

HAVING THIRTY DAYS

## 

ON THE 1ST OF THE MONTH

Beginning of the Indiction, that is of the New Year; and commemoration
of our Venerable Father Symeon the Stylite and Archimandrite; the
assembly of the most holy Mother of God of the Miasini; commemoration of
the Holy Martyr Aithalas; of the forty Holy Women and of the deacon
Ammoun, their teacher; of the Holy Martyrs Kallisti, Evodos and
Hermogenes, sister and brothers; commemoration of Jesus son of Navi; and
anniversary of the great fire.

## 

AT VESPERS

****

We recite the 1st Section of

Blessed is the man. **At** Lord, I have cried **we insert 10 Stichera,
and we sing 3 Prosomia of the Indiction, 3 of the Saint and a further 4,
Idiomels, of the Saint.**

Of the Indiction. Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Having learned to pray in his own words from Christ’s divine teaching,
let us cry out each day to the Creator: Our Father, who dwell in heaven,
give us our daily bread, overlooking our faults.

As the limbs of the Hebrews who truly disobeyed you, the Master of all,
were once fittingly strewn across the desert, so now too, O Christ, as
the Psalm says, scatter the bones of the impious and unbelieving
Hagarenes at the mouth of Hell.

Christ God, who once on Mount Sinai wrote the tables of the law, now
too, according to the flesh, in the city of Nazareth yourself took the
book of the prophet to read; and having closed it began to teach the
peoples that the Scripture had been fulfilled in you.

****

Stichera of the Saint.  
Tone 5. Model Melody. Venerable Father.

Venerable Father, you found a fair ladder, by which you went up on high,
the ladder which Elias found as a chariot of fire. He though did not
leave his mount to others, but you keep your pillar even after death.
Man of heaven, angel of earth, unsleeping beacon of the inhabited world,
Venerable Symeon, intercede that our souls may be saved.

Venerable Father, if the pillar could speak it would not cease crying
out your toils, your hardships, your laments. Though it supported, it
was itself supported, nourished like a tree with your tears. Angels were
amazed, mortals marvelled, demons cowered at your endurance. Venerable
Symeon, intercede that our souls may be saved.

Venerable Father, by the power of the divine Spirit, imitating your
Master, you went up onto a pillar as onto a cross. He though wiped out
the record of all, while you abolished the uprising of the passions; he
like a sheep, you like a victim; he on a cross, you on the pillar.
Venerable Symeon, intercede that our souls may be saved

****

Others, Idiomels, of the Saint. Tone 2.

A good fruit sprouted from a good root, Symeon, holy from infancy,
nurtured on grace rather than milk, and, having raised his body on a
rock and his mind yet higher towards God, with virtues he built a
habitation in the air, and walking on high with the divine Powers he
became a dwelling place of Christ, who is God and the Saviour of our
souls.

****

The same tone.

Your memorial, Venerable Father Symeon, and the meekness of your heart,
blessed servant, endure for ever; for though you have passed over from
us, good shepherd, you have not passed from us in spirit as you stand
near God in love and dance with the Angels in heaven. With them
intercede that our souls may be saved.

****

The same. By Kyprianos.

The casket of your relics, all-praised Father, is a source of healings;
and your holy soul, united with the Angels, fittingly rejoices.
Therefore, as you have boldness towards the Lord, Venerable Saint, and
dance with the Bodiless ones in heaven, implore him that our souls may
be saved.

****

The same. By Germanos.

You loved the highest philosophy, O God-bearer, and you dwelt outside
the world, living above visible things; and you were revealed as a
godly, untarnished mirror of God; and being ever one with Light, you
gained more light and clearly met a blessed end. Intercede for our
souls, wise Symeon.

Glory.

**Tone 6. By Germanos.**

Divine grace hovered over the casket of your relics, hallowed Symeon;
therefore we too run to the sweet fragrance of your wonders, drawing out
healing of diseases. But Venerable Father, intercede with Christ God on
behalf of our souls.

Both now.

**The same. By Byzantios.**

One with the Holy Spirit, O Word and Son without beginning, co-maker of
all and co-creator of all things visible and invisible, bless the crown
of the year, guarding in peace the multitudes of the Orthodox, at the
prayers of the Mother of God and of all the Saints.

****

Entrance,

O joyful light, **Prokeimenon of the Day and the Readings.**

The reading is from the prophecy of Isaias.  
\[

**Chap. 61,1-10**\] ****

T

he Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me. He has
sent me to preach good tidings to the poor, to heal the broken-hearted,
to proclaim forgiveness to prisoners and sight to the blind; to declare
an acceptable year of the Lord, and a day of recompense for our God; to
comfort all who mourn, that there may be given to those who mourn Sion,
glory instead of ashes; an anointing of joy for those who mourn,
clothing of glory instead of a spirit of despondency; and they will be
called a generation of righteousness, a plant of the Lord for glory. And
they will rebuild everlasting deserts, those formerly quite deserted;
they will raise up and renew deserted cities, deserted from generation
to generation. And strangers will come shepherding your flocks, and
foreigners will be your ploughmen and your vinedressers. But you will be
called Priests of the Lord, ministers of our God. You will be told,
‘Devour the strength of nations’, and in their wealth you will be
marvelled at; instead of your double shame and instead of humiliation
their portion will rejoice. Therefore they will inherit their land a
second time, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head. For I am the
Lord, who love righteousness and hate robberies from injustice; and I
shall give their calf to the righteous, and I shall make an everlasting
covenant with them. And their seed will be known among the nations, and
their offspring in the midst of the peoples. And the one who sees them
will recognise them, because they are a seed blessed to the ages by God,
and with joy they will rejoice in the Lord.

The Reading is from Leviticus.  
\[

**26:3-12, 14-17, 19-20, 22, 33, 23-24**\] ****

T

he Lord spoke to the children of Israel saying: If you walk in my
ordinances and keep my commandments and do them, I will give you rain in
its season and the earth will give its produce and the trees of the
plains their fruit. And your threshing time will overtake the vintage,
and the vintage will overtake the sowing. And you will eat your bread to
the full and dwell in safety on your land. And no one shall make you
afraid; and I will destroy the evil wild beasts from your lands, and war
shall not pass through your land. And enemies will fall before you. And
five of you will pursue a hundred and a hundred of you will pursue tens
of thousands. And I will look upon you and bless you and make you
increase and multiply and I will establish my covenant with you. And you
will eat what is old and very old, and bring out the old to make way for
the new. And I will set my tabernacle among you and my soul shall not
abhor you; and I will walk among you; and I will be your God and you
shall be my people. But if you will not listen to me, nor observe these
ordinances of mine, but disobey them, and if your soul loathes my
judgements, so that you do not keep all my commandments, I in turn will
do thus to you: I will bring distress upon you, and you will sow your
seed in vain and your enemies will devour your labours. And I will set
my face against you and you will fall before your foes and they will
pursue you and you will flee though no one pursues you; and I will smash
the arrogance of your pride. And I will make the heaven like iron for
you and your earth like solid bronze. And your strength will be in vain
and your land will not give its fruit, and the trees of the field will
not give their fruit. And I will send the wild beasts of the earth
against you, and they will consume your cattle, and the sword will come
against you and make you few in number. And your land will be desert and
your farms will be desert; because you have walked against me crookedly,
and I will walk against you with crooked rage, says the Lord God, the
Holy One of Israel.

The reading is from the Wisdom of Solomon.  
\[

**Chap. 4,7-15**\] ****

A

just man, even if he die early, will be at rest; for an honoured old age
is not so because of length of time, nor is it measured by the number of
years. Understanding is men’s true grey hairs, and a ripe old age is a
spotless life. Being pleasing to God, he was loved; and while living
among sinners, he was taken away. He was snatched away lest wickedness
alter his understanding, or trickery deceive his soul. For the witchery
of evil dims the good, and the waywardness of desire undermines an
innocent mind. Made perfect in a short time, he fulfilled long years;
for his soul was pleasing to the Lord; therefore he hurried him from the
midst of evil. But the peoples have seen and not understood, nor laid
such a thing to heart: that grace and mercy are with his holy ones, and
his presence with his chosen ones. ****

At the Aposticha. Idiomel Stichera of the Indiction.

By Monk John. Tone 1.

The entrance of the year is here, summoning all the shining ones to
honour it, Kallisti, Evodos and Hermogenes, brethren and champions;
Symeon the equal of the angels; Jesus son of Navi; the Seven Youths of
Ephesus, and the choir of Holy Women, beacon of forty fires. As we
celebrate their memories together, lovers of festivals, let us eagerly
cry out: O Lord, bless the works of your hands, and grant that we may
pass profitably through the course of the year.

****

The same tone.

Verse 1:

A hymn is due to you, O God, in Sion, and vows shall be paid you in
Jerusalem. ****

By the same.

Christ our God, who created all things with wisdom and brought them from
non-being into being, bless the crown of the year and preserve our city
unbesieged; make glad our faithful Sovereigns by your power, giving them
victories against enemies, through the Mother of God granting the world
your great mercy.

****

Tone 2.

Verse 2:

We shall be filled with the good things of your house: holy is your
temple, wonderful in righteousness. ****

By Kyprianos.

Wonderful are you, O God, and wonderful are your works, and your ways
are unsearchable; for you are the Wisdom of God and perfect substance
and power, co-operation like him without beginning and without end;
therefore by your all-powerful authority you came inexpressibly,
unchanged in your Godhead, from a Mother who did not know man, to visit
the world, seeking the creature you had beautified, setting bounds and
times, O Unchangeable, for our salvation. Therefore we cry out to you:
Loving Lord, glory to you\!

****

The same.

Verse 3: You will bless the crown of the year with your goodness, and
our fields will be filled with fatness.

****

By Monk John.

You who created all things with wisdom, Word of the Father before the
ages, and established the whole creation by your all-powerful word,
bless the crown of the year with your goodness, and overthrow heresies,
through the Mother of God, for you are good and love mankind.

Glory.

**Tone 5. Venerable Father.**

Venerable Father, you found a fair ladder, by which you went up on high,
the ladder which Elias found as a chariot of fire. He though did not
leave his mount to others, but you keep your pillar even after death.
Man of heaven, angel of earth, unsleeping beacon of the inhabited world,
Venerable Symeon, intercede that our souls may be saved.

Both now.

**The same. By Monk John.**

You, O King, Who Are and who abide even to ages without end, accept the
supplication of sinners who beg salvation; and grant, O Lover of
mankind, abundance to your land, giving it temperate weather; as once
with David, fight alongside our faithful King against godless
barbarians, for they have entered your tabernacles and defiled your
all-holy place, O Saviour. But grant victories, Christ God, at the
intercession of the Mother of God; for you are the victory and boast of
the Orthodox.

****

Apolytikion of the Indiction. Tone 2.

Fashioner of all creation, who fix times and seasons by your own
authority, bless the crown of the year with your goodness, Lord,
preserving the Kings and your city in peace, at the prayers of the
Mother of God, and save us.

Glory.

**Of the Saint. Tone 1.**

You became a pillar of endurance, Venerable Father, rivalling the
forefathers: Job in sufferings and Joseph in trials, and, while still in
the body, the life of the Bodiless Powers. Our Venerable Father Symeon,
intercede with Christ God that our souls may be saved.

Both now.

**Of the Mother of God. Tone 7.**

Hail full of grace, Virgin Mother of God, harbour and protection of the
human race; for from you the Redeemer of the world became incarnate; for
you alone are Mother and Virgin, ever blessed and glorified. Intercede
with Christ God to grant peace to the whole inhabited world.

****

And Dismissal.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

