\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](sep-int.md) \]
\[ [Short Synaxarion](syn-sep01.md) \]
\[ [Environment](environm.md) \]
\[ [1 September Vespers](sep01e.md) \]
\[ 1 September Matins & Liturgy \] \[ [5 September](05sep.md) \]
\[ [6 September](6_september.md) \] \[ [7 September](07sep.md) \]
\[ [13 September](13sep.md) \] \[ [23 September](23sept.md) \]
\[ [24 September](24sept.md) \] \[ [26 September](26_september.md) \]

# AT MATINS

**After the 1st Psalter reading, Kathisma of the Indiction.**

Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

O God, who grant fruitful seasons and rains from heaven for those on
earth, now too accept the petitions of your servants and deliver your
city from every constraint; for your acts of pity are for all your
works. Therefore bless our comings and goings, direct the works of our
hands for us and grant us forgiveness of offences; for you, the Powerful
One, brought all things from non-existence into being.

Glory. Both now.

**Repeat.**

After the 2nd Psalter reading, Kathisma of the Ascetic.

Tone 5. The Word without beginning.

You adorned your life with self-mastery, and having slain the body, you
wiped out the assaults of the foe, blessed Father; and, as a worthy
heir, you passed over to God, to everlasting life; therefore do not
cease to intercede that our souls may be saved.

Glory.

**Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.**

You came to the starting block of martyrdom, Kallisti, with your two
brothers faithfully proclaiming Christ our God; for having nurtured them
with love you made them true spiritual vessels of Christ’s Church;
therefore, as a Martyr, you were joined with them for the life on high.

Both now.

**Theotokion, to the same melody.**

Speedily accept our supplications, all-immaculate Sovereign Lady, and
offer them to your Son and God; banish the difficulties of those who
have recourse to you, scatter the ambushes and the insolence of those
who are now in arms against your servants.

\[

**After the Polyeleos, Kathisma of the Holy Women.**

Tone 1. The soldiers watching.

Rational Lambs, having finished your course and kept the faith,
faithfully you were offered through martyrdom to the Lamb and Shepherd.
And so today with joy we praise your sacred memory, noble Saints, as we
magnify Christ.

Glory. Both now.

**Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.**

As to the Master of the universe and Giver of good things, with faith we
fall down before you, as we fervently cry out: Entreated by your
compassion, Saviour, and by the prayers of her who gave you birth, and
of those who have ever been well pleasing to you, as you are good
vouchsafe to grant a prosperous year to those who honour you in two
natures and faithfully glorify you.

****

The 1st Antiphon of the 4th Tone.

Gospel of an Ascetic. Psalm 50.

Glory. At the prayers of your Ascetic…

Both now. At the prayers of the Mother of God…

Have mercy on me, O God,…

****

Idiomel Sticheron of the Ascetic. Tone 2.

You who created all things with wisdom, Word of the Father before the
ages, and established the whole creation by your all-powerful word,
bless the crown of the year with your goodness, and overthrow heresies,
through the Mother of God, as you are good and love mankind.\]

****

And the Canons.

The Canon for the Indiction. Composition of Monk John.

Ode 1. Tone 1. The Irmos.

Let us, all peoples, sing a song of victory to him who rescued Israel
from the bitter slavery of Pharao, and guided him dryshod in the depth
of the sea; for he has been glorified.

****

Troparia.

Let us all sing a song of victory to Christ, through whom all things
were established, and in whom they continue unerringly, as to the
subsistent Word born of God, the Father without beginning; for he has
been glorified.

Let us all sing a song of victory to Christ, who at the Father’s good
pleasure appeared from a Virgin and proclaimed an acceptable year of the
Lord, redemption for us; for he has been glorified.

Coming to Nazareth the provider of the Law would teach on the Sabbath,
instructing the Hebrews of his coming, through which, as he is merciful,
he will save our race.

****

Theotokion.

Let us, all Believers, ever praise in song the Maiden beyond marvels,
who made Christ dawn on the world and who filled all things with the joy
of everlasting life; for she has been glorified.

****

Canon of the Holy Women, whose Acrostic is:

Steadfast Women Martyrs’ toils I sing.

****

Ode 1. Tone 4. I will open my mouth.

Steadfastly, O Martyrs, you struggled with the opponent, first as
ascetics, then later by the contest through blood; therefore in faith we
celebrate your memories.

The weakness of the flesh forgotten, wounded by love for him who for us
endured cross and death, the holy women followed in his footsteps.

Worship of pagans and temples of demons you hurled to the ground with
the weapon of faith, and you were offered to the heavenly temple as
living treasures, all-honoured Martyrs.

****

Theotokion.

All spotless one, strengthened by the grace of him who dawned from your
womb, the young maidens escaped the swell of tortures and were brought
in your train rejoicing.

****

Canon of the Saint, whose Acrostic, without the Theotokia, is:

Accept the hymn, O blessed Symeon.

****

By Monk John.

Ode 1. Tone 8. Let us sing to the Lord.

As with the broken instrument of my tongue I weave this song for you,
Godbearing Symeon, grant me through your supplications divinely inspired
light of knowledge.

Persians, Ethiopians, Indians and Scythians and a multitude of Arabs
recognised your wisdom, Father, and they glorified Christ who is
glorified through you.

You were filled with spiritual grace; for, like Jacob, David and Moses,
you appeared from the sheepfolds as leader of spiritual flocks, O
blessed one.

****

Theotokion.

Immaculate Mother of God, hail honoured one, who contained in your womb
the uncontainable God, entreat that those who sing your praise you may
be redeemed.

****

Katavasia.

A Cross Moses traced out as he cut the Red Sea in a straight line with
his rod for Israel as they marched on foot; and then united it again,
overwhelming Pharao with his chariots, as with another line he marked
out the invincible weapon. Therefore let us sing to Christ our God, for
he has been glorified.

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 3. The Irmos..

Establish me, O Christ, on the unshakeable rock of your commandments,
and enlighten me with the light of your face; for none is holy but you,
O Lover of mankind.

****

Troparia.

Establish, O Good One, the fruitful vine, which your right hand has
planted with love upon the earth, preserving your Church, O
All-powerful.

Grant, Lord, that those who in faith sing your praise as God of the
universe, may pass through this year abounding in spiritual works,
well-pleasing to God.

Let the circle of the year be calm for me, O merciful Christ, and fill
me with your divine words, which you appeared speaking to the Jews on
the Sabbath.

****

Theotokion.

As the one who alone surpassing nature received the grace that surpasses
mankind, Christ our God, who dwelt unaltered in your womb, we ever
glorify you.

****

Of the Holy Women. He weakened the bow.

Strengthened by almighty strength, you overthrew the power of your
opponents; therefore as victors you have been crowned by Christ.

The jaws of the wild beasts were seen to be powerless through Christ’s
divine might, and you were delivered, God-bearers, unharmed as you
honoured God.

Made divine by your intent on God, O Victors, you beat off the chill of
polytheism and reached the warmth of the glory on high.

****

Theotokion.

We know and devoutly proclaim you, All-spotless One, to be most truly
Mother of God; for through you the Creator deigned to speak with us.

****

Of the Saint..

Swiftly fleeing the icy blast of the winds, you boldly reached a
dwelling of salvation, Symeon, from which you plucked the fruit of life
that does not age.

Gladly you inclined your obedient ear to the Master who promised
blessedness; and blessed was the way of life you found.

Having welcomed the seeds of the word in the furrows of your heart, with
floods of tears, you reaped for Christ a full ear of virtues.

****

Theotokion.

Bride of God, ineffably you conceived the Saviour and Lord, who from
troubles delivers us who call on you in truth.

****

Katavasia.

A Rod is accepted as a figure of the mystery; for by its budding it
marks out the priest. While for the Church that once was barren the Tree
of the Cross has flowered for strength and steadfastness.

\[

**Kontakion of the Indiction.**

Composed in the year 1813 by the revered Patriarch of Constantinople
Cyril VI.

Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

You created the universe in your ineffable wisdom, and fixed the seasons
by your authority; grant victories to your Christ-loving people; may you
bless our goings and comings of the year, directing our works to your
divine will.\]

****

Kathisma of the Saint. Tone 8. The Wisdom and Word.

Burning with faith, wise Father, and despising all temporary things, you
followed Christ, in the power of the Spirit, having melted your body,
Venerable One, by self-mastery, ever looking towards the glory of
heaven; therefore you found for your divine ascent the ladder of the
pillar fitting your longing, holy Symeon. Intercede with Christ God to
grant forgiveness of offences to those who feast with love your holy
memory.

Glory.

**Of the Holy Women.**

Tone 1. The soldiers watching.

Rational Lambs, having finished your course and kept the faith,
faithfully you were offered through martyrdom to the Lamb and Shepherd.
And so today with joy we praise your sacred memory, noble Saints, as we
magnify Christ.

Both now.

**Of the Indiction.**

Tone 4. Joseph was amazed..

As to the Master of the universe and Giver of good things, with faith we
fall down before you, as we fervently cry out: Entreated by your
compassion, Saviour, and by the prayers of her who gave you birth, and
of those who have ever been well pleasing to you, as you are good
vouchsafe to grant a prosperous year to those who honour you in two
natures and faithfully glorify you.

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 4.

The Irmos.

I have learned of your dispensation, All-powerful One, and I have
glorified you with fear, O Saviour.

****

Troparia.

Your people offers you its annual firstfruits, glorifying you with
Angels’ hymns, O Saviour.

As you love mankind, grant, O Christ, that those who start the year may
complete it in a way pleasing to you.

Almighty, only Lord, grant to the world that the revolutions of the
years be calm.

****

Theotokion.

Let us all hymn the Mother of God as harbour and sure hope of our souls.

****

Of the Holy Women. The One seated.

Having endured tortures and rackings of the body by varied means,
crushing and burning of the limbs, you have inherited heavenly dwellings
and enjoy the tree of life, O Admirable ones.

The Powers of heaven marvelled at the struggle of the blessed maidens,
how they routed the foe, being given power in their woman’s nature by
the power of him who dawned from a woman.

Having cast aside all the vanity of the world, you clung with your whole
soul to God and to him alone; therefore, Brides of Christ, you endured
most stoutly the toils of the ascetic life and of the martyr’s contest.

Bearing the Cross as the strongest of weapons, you stood in battle
against hostile regiments. With Christ, who conquered the world by the
power of his divinity, you carried off the victory.

****

Theotokion.

The Lord came down as rain upon a fleece into your womb, as the Prophet
said of old, All-pure one, the Lord whom you bore in two natures, to
whom we cry: Glory, O Christ, to your power.

****

Of the Saint. Lord, I have heard.

It was not on sand but on the deepest toils that you laid the foundation
of your ascetic life, All blessed one, and built an unshakeable tower of
virtues.

The roughest rope your body’s lot to nail it to the fear of the spirit,
you found, O Venerable one, the allotment of a divine inheritance.

The hidden passions of the body ebbed away in rotting decay, that even
the worms feared you as you slept.

Imitating the life-giving Dead after his voluntary passion, as in a tomb
you placed yourself in a gloomy well

****

Theotokion.

Immaculate Mary, implore the God whom you bore to grant your servants
pardon of their offences.

****

Katavasia.

Lord, I have heard the mystery of your dispensation; I have considered
your works and glorified your Godhead.

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 5. The Irmos.

Rising in the night we hymn you, O Christ, without beginning with the
Father, and the Saviour of our souls. Grant the world peace, O Lover of
mankind.

****

Troparia.

O Christ, who fill all things with goodness, grant to your servants
that, crowned with blessings, the many circled time may be temperate and
prosperous.

Let the change of the year be an alteration for the better and a
condition of peace for us who know you, O Word, to be coeternal with the
Father.

Without beginning with the Father, you who are beyond time came upon
earth, announcing in the Father’s name forgiveness for prisoners and new
sight for the maimed.

****

Theotokion.

Our hopes and our confidence we place in you, Mother of God, make him to
whom you gave birth kindly to us.

****

Of the Holy Women. The ungodly will not see.

As spotless lambs, as acceptable sacrifices, O Martyrs, you were offered
to the true Lamb and Shepherd, as whole burnt offerings and acceptable
holocausts.

Slain in body, you were alive in soul, O Martyrs, for you imitated the
Cross, the death and the voluntary sufferings of him who slew the
strength of death.

Being of one mind in many bodies, rent by divers scourges and burned by
fire, the Godly-minded Martyrs confessed one Lord Jesus.

****

Theotokion.

Set me upright, who am fallen into a pit of temptations, and pilot me, O
only all-spotless one, who gave birth to God, the pilot who by his
goodness united things formerly separated.

****

Of the Saint. Enlighten us.

Christ showed you, Symeon, to be a new Daniel; for, through a
revelation, he brought you unharmed from a pit infested with wild
beasts.

Offering your whole self to the Lord, you bared yourself to the hostile
elements of snow, ice and heat.

You were shown to be a new Moses and a new Elias, throughout your life
living for the forty days on one meal, venerable Father.

****

Theotokion.

Ever implore your Son and our God, pure Mary who knew not wedlock, to
send down his mercy upon us the faithful.

****

Katavasia.

Thrice-blessed Tree, on which Christ, the King and Lord, was stretched\!
Through it the one who deceived through a tree has fallen, caught by the
bait of God who was nailed to you in the flesh and who grants peace to
our souls.

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 6. The Irmos.

You saved the Prophet from the whale, O Lover of mankind, bring me too
up from the deep of offences, I beg.

****

Troparia.

Grant, Master, that with the start of the year we may offer you the
first fruits of a life that is pleasing to you.

Compassionate Saviour, by participation in your law show us who sing
your praise to be full of days of the Spirit.

****

Theotokion.

O you who gave birth to Christ our God, we beg you, deliver from every
threat those who flee to you.

****

Of the Holy Women. He cried out, foreshadowing.

Their foremother was overjoyed as she watched the one who formerly
exiled her by trickery from Paradise broken and trampled down by women’s
feet.

You combined the ascetic life with the contest of martyrdom, and now you
have been joined without corruption to the Bridegroom of souls, and with
joyful souls you take your places in the divine bridal chamber.

Mounting wild waves of tortures could not sink the vessels of the
Martyrs, for with a strong hand they made for the divine havens.

****

Theotokion.

As you see the fulfilment of your words, magnify even more, O Mother of
God, him who magnified you; for behold all generations truly call you
blessed.

****

Of the Saint. Grant me a tunic.

Blessed Father, Christ displayed you as a worker of signs and wonders,
having shown you to be a dwelling place of divine force.

Your body was raised on the column as on a cross; therefore you have
been glorified with Christ who was raised on a tree for your sake.

Having found a pathway in the air, inspired Symeon, bring up to the
heights of heaven those who faithfully sing your praise.

****

Theotokion.

We the faithful declare you, Mother of God, to be the temple and ark of
God, living bridal chamber and gate of heaven.

****

Katavasia.

Jonas, stretching out his hands like a cross in the belly of the sea
monster, clearly prefigured the saving Passion. Escaping from there on
the third day, he was an image of the transcendent Resurrection of
Christ God, who was nailed in the flesh and by his rising on the third
day enlightened the world.

****

Kontakion of the Saint. Tone 2. Model Melody.

Seeking things above and joined to things below, you made your column a
chariot of fire, through which you have become a companion of the
Angels, with them unceasingly imploring Christ God on behalf of us all.

****

The Ikos.

What human will ever suffice to sing the praise of Symeon’s blameless
life? Nevertheless with God’s wisdom I shall hymn the contests and
struggles of the hero, of the one who appeared on earth as a beacon for
all mortals, and by perseverance shone brightly for the choir of Angels;
for singing with them unceasingly he does not cease imploring Christ on
behalf of us all.

****

Synaxarion.

The Month of September, having 30 days.  
The day has 12 hours and the night 12 hours.

On the 1st of the month, Beginning of the Indiction, that is of the New
Year.

****

Verses.

  
New year’s Indiction bless for us, we pray,  
O you, both Ancient and, for mankind, New.

Note that the Church of God celebrates the Indiction, having received
the tradition from the ancients, for it was thought by the Romans that
this Indiction marked the beginning of the year (the word Indiction
means for the Romans ‘boundary’). Moreover because on this day Our Lord
Jesus Christ entered the Synagogue of the Jews and being handed a book
(it was that of the Prophet Isaias), He opened it and found the passage
where it is written: ‘The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore He
has anointed me; He has sent me to preach the gospel to the poor; to
heal the broken hearted; to proclaim forgiveness for prisoners, and
sight to the blind; to proclaim an acceptable year of the Lord’
\[Is.61,1-2\]. Then he handed the book to the attendant, sat down and
said: ‘To-day this Scripture has been fulfilled in your ears’. When too
the crowds marvelled at the words of grace that came from his mouth
\[Lk. 4,16-22\]

.

On the same day we commemorate the marvel which took place through the
Holy Mother of God in the Monastery of the Miasini; and the fire that
took place.

****

Verses.

  
Strange was the catch that by itself came up  
From harbour’s depth: the Virgin’s honoured image.

The commemoration of the Mother of God of the Miasini is kept because of
the wonder-working and holy ikon of the Mother of God which had been
thrown into the harbour of Zagouros, of the Monastery of the Miasini,
through fear of the iconoclasts, and was, by God’s good pleasure,
returned unharmed after many years.

The commemoration of the fire; because of the great fire which took
place in Constantinople, because of our sins, in the reign of Leo the
great King, nicknamed the Pick-axe, in the year 450, and which ravaged
by fire most of the city in seven days.

On the same day, commemoration of our venerable Father Symeon the
Stylite.

****

Verses.

His pillared station Symeon left behind,  
And took his stand beside the Word of God.  
High stepping Symeon died on the first of the month of September.

Symeon the Stylite lived in the reign of Leo the Great and when
Martyrios was Bishop of Antioch. He came from the Eparchy of Cilicia,
from the village of Sesan. He adopted the monastic life and having
ascended a column, he persevered there for forty seven years and having
become the worker of many wonders he died in peace.

On the same day, commemoration of the Venerable Martha, mother of the
Venerable Symeon; and of the Venerable Evanthia; and the falling asleep
of Jesus son of Navi.

****

Verses.

On earth of old once Martha welcomed Christ.  
Now Christ in heaven, Martha, welcomes you.

The sun that once he halted left behind,  
Now Jesus contemplates the Sun of glory.

This Jesus was the son of Navi and successor of Moses as lawgiver for
the Hebrews. He captured Jericho, a city of foreigners and saw the Chief
Captain Michael holding a sword. On learning that he was the Chief
Captain of the Power of the Lord, he threw away his arms and fell at his
feet. Once when fighting a battle against foreigners the sun was about
to set, so in his zeal for battle he prayed to God and said: ‘Let the
sun stand still’; and at once the sun stopped in its course and did not
set until he had mightily routed the foreigners. He was commander of the
people and led them from the wilderness and apportioned to them the land
of Promise, which is Palestine. He judged the people of Israel for
twenty seven years, became the dread of his enemies and, having
displayed his courage and virtue in many wars, died and was buried with
honour by his own people.

On the same day, commemoration of the forty Holy Women Martyrs, Virgins
and Ascetics, and of the Deacon Ammoun, their teacher.

****

Verses.

  
For virgins double twenty fire and sword  
Secured as Bridegroom Christ the Son of God.

A helmet heated in the flames Ammoun received:  
Stripped off his covering of flesh with joy.

These Martyrs were from Adrianoupolis in Macedonia, and being Christians
they followed Christ, having as their teacher the Deacon Ammoun.
Arrested by Vavdos the Governor of Adrianoupolis and fiercely tortured
for not worshipping the idols they prayed to God, and the priest of the
idols was suspended in mid-air, was punished for many hours then fell
and perished. Saint Ammoun was strung up and his sides were burned; then
a red-hot helmet was placed on his head. Delivered from this, he was
sent with the holy Virgins from Verroi to Heraklion in Thrace, to the
tyrant Licinius; and by the latter’s decision ten of them were thrown
into the flames, eight with their teacher were beheaded; another ten
died by being pierced with swords in face and heart, six were cut to
pieces with knives, the rest departed to the Lord having been made to
swallow lumps of heated iron.

On the same day, commemoration of the Holy Martyrs, sister and brothers,
Evodos, Kallisti and Hermogenes.

****

Verses.  

Fairest \[**kalliston**\] indeed the end Kallisti found,  
With her two brothers, likewise fair\[**kalois**\], cut down.

These holy martyrs were sister and brothers, born from the same womb and
born again spiritually from the divine font, at the times of the
preaching. But when they were denounced to the Governor as Christians
and the noble courage and unshakeable resolve of their soul was
realised, the Governor passed sentence of death by the sword against
them; and having thus completed the race of martyrdom, they departed to
the Lord

.

The venerable Meletios the Young, ascetic on the mountain of Nyoupolis,
died in peace.

The Holy New Martyr Angelis, who bore his witness in Constantinople in
1680, died by the sword.

At their holy intercessions, O God, have mercy on us. Amen.

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 7. The Irmos..

The Youths brought up together in piety, despising the impious decree,
did not fear the threat of the fire, but standing in the middle of the
flames they sang, ‘God of our fathers, blessed are you\!’

****

Troparia.

As we begin the year let us the Orthodox people offer the first fruits
of our hymns to Christ who reigns over the kingdom without bounds, as we
devoutly sing: God of our fathers, blessed are you\!

O Christ who exist before the ages, Lord for ever and ever, the source
of goodness, fill the year with your good gifts for us who sing: God of
our fathers, blessed are you\!

****

Theotokion.

Christ our Master, we your servants bring you in intercession your pure
Mother, that your people may be delivered from every difficulty, as they
sing: God of our fathers, blessed are you\!

****

Of the Holy Women. He who saved in fire.

How undaunted your resolution, Godbearing Ammoun; for as leader of the
choir of virgins you did not flinch at tortures, but died with them, as
minister and initiate of God’s glory.

How wise you are, Escort of the brides; with words of courage you anoint
the Martyrs: let them fix their gaze on the Bridegroom and bravely
endure the pains of the flesh as they cry: God of our fathers, blessed
are you\!

The noble Martyrs in the stadium cried out: Maidens, let us not falter.
See, the stadium is open. Let us stand bravely; Christ is holding out
the crowns. Let us not spare our bodies.

****

Theotokion.

Blessed is the fruit of your blessed womb, whom the Powers of heaven and
the ranks of mortals bless, for he has delivered us from the ancient
curse, O Blessed one.

****

Of the Saint. Youths who honoured God.

You ended a drought for the despairing and opened for them the gates of
rain, and steadied the shaken land, and you taught peoples to cry:
Blessed is the God of our fathers\!

As a mighty beacon of the Church and sun of many lights, O Symeon, you
sent out beams in all directions , enlightened peoples and taught them
to cry: Blessed is the God of our fathers\!

Streams flowing together from every side, Servant of Christ, a sea of
men welded together in the fold of your ascetic discipline, was taught
by you to cry out: Blessed is the God of our fathers\!

Of old in the arms of the Elder, but now in the tables of your heart,
Venerable Symeon, Christ took his rest by his invisible power; therefore
you cried: Blessed is the God of our fathers\!

****

Theotokion.

It was fitting for him who took flesh without seed to come forth from
you, immaculate Virgin; for you, O Pure one, brought forth him who
surpasses all things, to whom with hymns we shout and cry: Blessed is
the God of our fathers\!

****

Katavasia.

The senseless decree of a godless tyrant, redolent of threats and
blasphemies hateful to God, drove peoples to confusion. But neither the
fury of wild beasts nor the roaring of the fire frightened three Youths;
but united in the fire that answered with a spirit bringing dew they
sang, ‘O our God and the God of our Fathers, O highly exalted, blessed
are you\!’

****

Of the Indiction. Ode 8. The Irmos..

Praise in hymns Christ God, who protected the Youths as they sang
praises in the furnace and who turned the roaring furnace into dew, and
highly exalt him to the ages.

****

Troparia.

The holy Church offers you, O Christ, as author of salvation, the first
fruits of the year as she cries: Praise in hymns and highly exalt Christ
to the ages.

The Creator who wisely made all things new out of nothing, and arranges
the revolutions of the seasons by his will, praise in hymns and highly
exalt him to the ages.

To God who arranges all things and alters the seasons for the varied
guidance of mankind we sing: Praise him in hymns and highly exalt him to
the ages.

****

Theotokion.

In the passing and the revolutions of the years the ranks of Orthodox
mortals, pure Virgin Mother of God, sing your praise as God’s Mother and
salvation of all.

****

Of the Holy Women. The Offspring of the Mother of God.

As Martyrs you wrapped yourselves in garments bright and shining as from
blood, having together truly put off the humanity that was corrupted by
sins, and you sang: You his works praise the Lord, and highly exalt him
to all the ages.

Enlightened by abundant floods of light, the divine brightness of the
spiritual Sun, you ran, O Martyrs, through the night of godlessness as
you sang in unison of soul: You his works praise the Lord, and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

Like sheep like spotless lambs, like divine doves and willing victims,
and like unblemished sacrifices, O Martyrs, you were offered to the
Creator as you sang in harmony: You his works praise the Lord and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

On the orders of lawless tyrants you underwent an unjust death, your
limbs cut up, battered with rods, mercilessly struck, slain by the
sword; and so in joy you inherit your rich undying recompense.

****

Theotokion.

Women ran behind you, all pure Bride of God, sensing the sweet fragrance
of the perfumes of the only-begotten Son who shone forth from your womb,
and they reign with you indeed as they praise Christ to the ages.

****

Of the Saint.

Having left every attachment and pitying a mother’s weakness, as though
living you appeared after death, crying out: Hymn the Lord and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

You gave strength to a paralysed sick youth and ordered him to carry the
tribal chief like his bed on his shoulders as he hymned the Lord and
highly exalted him to all the ages.

He who made Job shine brightly through suffering, when your flesh was
suppurating with rottenness turned you, servant of Christ, into a
priceless pearl, as he glorified you, Symeon, to all the ages.

At Symeon’s entreaties, Master, you summoned a vengeful robber chief, as
of old the Thief on the tree; therefore we hymn you and highly exalt you
to all the ages.

****

Theotokion.

Virgin Mother of God, who received the Angel’s ‘Hail\!’, bore the Lord
of glory and made the light dawn on the world, we all hymn you and
glorify you.

****

Katavasia.

O Youths, equal in number to the Trinity, bless the Creator, Father,
God; sing the praises of the Word who descended and changed the fire to
dew, and highly exalt the all-holy Spirit that grants life to all, to
the ages.

****

The Magnificat is not sung.

Of the Indiction. Ode 9. The Irmos.

The bush that unburned blazed with fire showed an image of you pure
child-bearing; and now we beseech you to quench the furnace of
temptations which rages against us, that we me ceaselessly magnify you,
O Mother of God.

****

Troparia.

O Word and Power of God, true and hypostatic Wisdom, who hold together
and govern all things, dispose the season which now confronts your
servants in a condition of calm

Alone you existed before the ages, as maker and sovereign of ages,
three-personned, one indivisible Godhead; at the prayers of the holy
Mother of God proclaim the victory to your inheritance.

****

Theotokion.

Saviour and Master of all, Creator and Ruler of creation, at the prayers
of her who bore you without travail, give peace to your world, and guard
your Church unceasingly from faction.

****

Of the Holy Women. Eve by the sickness.

The all-blessed Martyrs pour out streams of healings as from a fountain
for those in need, they halt the ravages of disease, dispel the heat of
passions, fire the hearts of those who love God, to bring forth the good
fruit of godly deeds.

The godly Deacon Ammoun with Kelsina and forty other godly minded holy
women competed like trained athletes and received their crowns; and now
they dance with the Angels, while we, as is right, call them blest.

Having raised your might against the foe you were exalted and have
become as Angels. You enjoy the tree of life in Paradise without
constraint, O Brides of God, and now you possess a source of blessings,
as you intercede for the world.

****

Theotokion.

Blameless Maiden, you have been revealed as the place of the mighty
Wisdom beyond understanding, a living throne and gateway; therefore
virgins loved you as Queen, O Virgin, and have been brought in your
train, O Child of God.

****

Of the Saint.

As one who had shown himself a king through steadfastness in sufferings,
godly Symeon, Christ approved you as sharer of his royal rule; therefore
in hymns we magnify you.

Granted the grace of healing from the inexhaustible treasury of the
Spirit, godly Symeon, you reward with healings those who celebrate your
memory.

You have walked the path of heavenly virtue, you have displayed the
prize from on high, you have reached the heavenly dwellings: intercede
that our souls may be saved.

****

Theotokion.

You have been shown to be the bush that burned yet was not consumed by
fire, by conceiving without seed, O Virgin, the God and Saviour of the
world, whom we unceasingly magnify.

****

Katavasia.

Mystic Paradise are you, O Mother of God; untilled you brought forth
Christ, who planted on the earth the life-giving Tree of the Cross. And
so, as it is raised today, we worship it and magnify you.

****

Another.

The death that came to the race through eating of the tree has, through
the Cross, today been made of no effect. For the curse on all mankind of
our mother Eve has been abolished by the shoot of the pure Mother of
God, whom all the Powers of heaven magnify.

****

Exapostilarion of the Indiction. With the Disciples.

O God of gods and Lord, three-personned nature, unapproachable, eternal,
uncreated and almighty creator of the universe, we all fall before you
and we implore you: as you are good, bless this present year, preserve
our Sovereigns and all your people in peace, O Merciful One.

****

Of the Saint. The same melody.

Like a beacon, Venerable one, your light-bearing life blazed out and
enlightened the whole earth with the rays of your wonders; for through a
pillar, Father, you ascended as by a ladder to God, where truly exists
the goal of all desires, as you intercede for those who honour you,
blest Symeon.

****

Theotokion. The same melody.

As Saviour and Master of all creation, who fix times and seasons by your
authority, crown the circle of the year, O Merciful, with blessings of
goodness, preserving your people in peace, unharmed, unhurt, we beseech
you, at the prayers of her who bore you and of all the godly Saints.

****

At Lauds we insert 4 Verses and we sing the following Idiomels.

Tone 3. By Monk John.

Word of the Father before time, who are in the form of God and who
brought all creation out of non-being into being; and who fix times and
seasons by your own authority: bless the crown of the year with your
goodness, granting peace to your Churches, victories to our faithful
Sovereign, abundant fruit of the earth and your great mercy.

****

By the same. Tone 4.

Your kingdom, Christ God, is the kingdom of all the ages, and your
dominion is from generation to generation; you have made all things in
wisdom, fixing for us times and seasons; therefore we thank you for all
things and through all things we cry out: Bless the crown of the year
with your goodness and grant that we may all cry out to you without
condemnation: Lord, glory to you\!

****

The same melody. By Andrew of Pyros.

Your paths, O God, your paths are great and wonderful; therefore we
magnify you for the might of your dispensation, for, light from light,
you visited your wretched world, and in your good pleasure, O Word, did
away with the first curse on ancient Adam, and you fixed for us times
and seasons for glorifying your all-pervading goodness. Lord, glory to
you\!

****

Tone 2. By Germanos.

When by your Passion, Lord, you established the whole world, then the
weak clothed themselves in power: women showed manly courage against the
villainous tyrant, and having reversed the mother’s defeat of old, they
have reached the pleasure of Paradise, to your glory, who were born of a
woman and have saved the human race.

Glory.

**Of the Saint. Tone 2.**

A good fruit sprung from a good root, Symeon, holy from infancy, was
nurtured on grace rather than milk; and having raised his body on a rock
and his mind yet higher towards God, with virtues he built a habitation
in the skies, and walking on high with the divine Powers he has become a
dwelling place of Christ, God and the Saviour of our souls.

Both now.

**Tone 8. By Germanos.**

O Word, Christ God, who brought the whole universe into being, who fix
times and seasons for us, bless the works of your hands, by your power
make our faithful Sovereign glad, granting him strength against
barbarians, for you alone are good and love mankind.

****

Great Doxology, and Dismissal.

## 

AT THE LITURGY

****

Typika and Beatitudes, and from the Canons of the Indiction and the
Saint from Odes 3 & 6.

8\.

Establish, O Good one, the fruitful vine, which your right hand has
planted with longing on the earth, preserving your Church, O All
powerful. ****

7\.

Grant, Lord, that those who in faith hymn you, the God of all, may pass
through this year abounding in spiritual works, well-pleasing to God.
****

6\.

Let the circle of the year be calm for me, O merciful Christ, and fill
me with your divine words, which you appeared speaking to the Jews on
the Sabbath. ****

5\.

As the one who alone above nature received the grace beyond humanity,
Christ our God, who dwelt unaltered in your womb, we ever glorify you.
****

4\.

Blessed Father, Christ displayed you as a worker of signs and wonders,
having shown you to be a dwelling place of divine force. ****

3\.

Your body was raised on the column as on a cross; therefore you have
been glorified with Christ who was raised on a tree for your sake. ****

2\.

Having found a pathway in the air, inspired Symeon, bring up to the
heights of heaven those who faithfully hymn you. ****

1\.

We the faithful declare you, Mother of God, to be the temple and ark of
God, living bridal chamber and gate of heaven. ****

Apolytikion of the Indiction. Tone 2.

Fashioner of all creation, who fixes times and seasons by your own
authority, bless the crown of the year with your goodness, O Lord,
preserving the Kings and your city in peace, at the intercessions of the
Mother of God and save us.

****

Of the Mother of God. Tone 7.

Hail full of grace, Virgin Mother of God, harbour and protection of the
human race; for from you the Redeemer of the world became incarnate; for
you alone are Mother and Virgin, ever blessed and glorified. Intercede
with Christ God to grant peace to the whole world.

****

Of the Saint. Tone 1.

You became a pillar of endurance, venerable Father, rivalling the
forefathers, Job in sufferings and Joseph in trials, and while still in
the body the life of the Bodiless ones. Our Venerable Father Symeon,
intercede with Christ God that our souls may be saved.

****

Kontakion of the Indiction.

Tone 3. Today the Virgin.

You created the universe in your ineffable wisdom, and fixed the seasons
by your authority; grant victories to your Christ-loving people; may you
bless our goings and comings of the year, directing our works to your
divine will.

Glory.

**Another, of the Saint.**

Tone 2. Model Melody.

Seeking things above and joined to things below, you made your column a
chariot of fire, through which you have become a companion of the
Angels, with them unceasingly imploring Christ God on behalf of us all.

Both now.

**Of the Nativity of the Mother of God.**

Joachim and Ann were freed from the reproach of childlessness, and Adam
and Eve from the corruption of death by your holy Nativity, O
Immaculate. Freed from the guilt of offences your people also celebrates
it, as they cry to you: The barren woman bears the Mother of God and the
nourisher of our life.

****

Prokeimenon. Tone 4.

Great is our God, and great his strength: \* and there is no measuring
his understanding.

****

Verse:

Praise the Lord, for to sing his praise is good: may our praise delight
our God.

\[

**Epistle to Timothy. See the 33rd Saturday.**\]

The Reading is from the 2nd Epistle of Paul to Timothy.  
\[

**2:11-19**\] ****

C

hild Timothy, the word is sure: if we have suffered with him, we shall
also live with him; if we endure, we shall also reign with him; if we
deny him, he in turn will deny us; if we are unfaithful, he remains
faithful: he cannot deny himself. Remind people of these things, warning
them before the Lord not to wrangle over words, which serves no useful
purpose, but ruins those who listen. Be eager to take your stand before
God as one well tested, a worker who is unashamed, who rightly proclaims
the word of truth. Avoid profane and idle talk; for it only makes people
advance in impiety, and their word will spread like gangrene. Among them
are Hymenaios and Philetos, who have swerved from the truth by saying
that the resurrection has already taken place. They are upsetting the
faith of some. But God’s firm foundation stands and carries this
inscription, ‘The Lord knows those who are his’ and ‘Let everyone who
calls on the name of the Lord turn away from wickedness.’

\[A

**nd another Epistle, for the Saint, to the Colossians.  
See the 30th Sunday.**\]

The Reading is from the Epistle of Paul to the Colossians.  
\[

**3:12-16**\] ****

B

rethren, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, clothe yourselves with
compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, and patience. Bear with one
another and, if anyone has a complaint against another, forgive each
other; just as Christ has forgiven you, so you also must forgive. Above
all, clothe yourselves with love, which binds everything together in
perfect harmony. And let the peace of Christ rule in your hearts, to
which indeed you were called in the one body. And be thankful. Let the
word of Christ dwell in you richly; teach and admonish one another in
all wisdom; and with gratitude in your hearts sing psalms, hymns, and
spiritual songs to God. ****

Alleluia. Tone 4.

Verse 1:

To you praise is due in Sion: and to you a vow will be performed. ****

Verse 2:

We shall be filled with the good things of your house: holy is your
temple, wonderful in justice.

Gospel according to Luke.  
\[

**4:12-16**\]

At that time, Jesus came to Nazareth.

****

And of the Saint. From that according to Matthew. See January 20th.,
Matthew 11:27-30.

\[**The current Greek Gospel book gives that for St John Chrysostom,
November 13th, John 10:9-16.**\] ****

Communion of the Indiction.

Bless the crown of the year with your goodness, O Lord. \[Alleluia.\]

****

And of the Saint.

The just will be held in eternal memory. Alleluia.

****

NOTE ON THE TYPIKON

The present Menaion gives a Polyeleos and Gospel for Matins, but this is
modern, and the texts used as Kathisma and Idiomel are used elsewhere in
the office. The Typikon of Dionysiou makes no mention of this addition,
nor, in fact, does the Typikon printed in the Menaion. This section has
therefore been printed within square brackets. There are also some
differences over the Apostle and Gospel for the Saint. The Menaion
prescribes for the Liturgy the Gospel for Matins of St Efthymios, not
that for the Liturgy, which is Luke 6:17-21. These two Gospels are in
fact interchangeable between Matins and Liturgy. See, for example
December 4th , St Savvas.

In the following notes the parts in square brackets are taken from the
Typikon of Dionysiou and represent the fuller, monastic, use.

If the 1st of September falls on a Sunday, the Typikon is as follows.
\[The off ice of the Holy Women is omitted, or read at Compline.\]

On Saturday evening the whole of the 1st Kathisma of the Psalter is
said, even if the 1st Section is sung. At Lord, I have cried 4 Stichera
of the Resurrection in the Tone of the week, 3 of the Indiction and the
3 Prosomia of the Saint. Glory of the Indiction, Tone 6, One with the
Holy Spirit and Both now the 1st Theotokion of the Tone. Entrance, O
joyful light, prokeimenon of the day and the Readings. At the Aposticha,
the Stichera and verses from the Oktoichos, Glory of the Saint Venerable
Father, and Both now of the Indiction You, O King. Apolytikia of the
Resurrection, of the Indiction and of the Mother of God Hail, full of
grace. \[Or Resurrection, Saint and Indiction.\] And Dismissal.

At Matins, at The Lord is God, Apolytkia as at Vespers, except that the
Resurrection one is sung twice. The Resurrection Kathismata and that of
the Indiction O God who grant fruitful seasons twice. \[That is, it
replaces the Theotokion each time.\] After Psalm 118, the Evlogitaria,
the Ypakoï, the Anavathmi of the Tone and the Prokeimenon. The Canons,
of the Resurrection and of the Indiction. \[Or, more correctly, that of
the Resurrection and the Mother of God to 6. That is, the Irmos and
Troparia of the Resurrection (=4) and 2 Troparia from the canon to the
Mother of God (= 6). Of the Indiction (4) and of the Saint (4), making
14.\] The Katavasias of the Cross. After the 3rd Ode, Kontakion and Ikos
of the Resurrection and the final Kathisma of the Indiction As Master of
the universe. \[Or, Kontakion and Ikos of the Resurrection, Glory
Kathisma of the Saint, Both now Kathisma of the Indiction As Master of
the universe.\] After the 6th Ode, Kontakion and Ikos of the Indiction,
\[Or, Kontakion and Ikos of the Saint\] the Synaxarion of the day. The
Magnificat is sung. Exapostilaria of the Resurrection, the Saint and the
Indiction .At Lauds, 4 Stichera of the Resurrection and 4 of the
Indiction (doubling the first), Glory of the Indiction O Word, Christ
God and the usual Sunday Theotokion. \[Or, 4 Stichera of the
Resurrection, 3 of the Indiction and the Doxastikon of the Saint, with
the appropriate verses, A hymn is due to you, O God in Sion (see the
Aposticha of Vespers) and Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death
of holy one, Glory the Eothinon of the Sunday and the usual Sunday
Theotokion. Great Doxology and the usual Resurrection Troparion. First
Hour \[and Catechesis of St Theodore\].

At the Hours the Resurrection Apolytikion is read at each, but that of
the Indiction and Saint are read alternately. The Ypakoï and Kontakion
of the Saint are both read.

At the Liturgy, Typika and Beatitudes, with of which 4 Troparia of the
Resurrection in the Tone of the week, and 4 from Ode 6 of the Indiction
\[Or, and 4 from Ode 3 of the canon of the Indiction and 4 from Ode 6 of
the canon of the Saint, making 12\] After the Entrance, Apolytikia of
the Resurrection, the Indiction, the Mother of God, the Saint and the
Church.. Kontakion of the Indiction \[Or, of the Resurrection, the
Indiction, the Saint, the Church and the Mother of God.\] Apostle,
Gospel and Communion of the Indiction \[Or, of the Indiction and the
Saint. Those of the Sunday are omitted.\]

\[After the Prayer behind the Ambo at once the Apolytiokion and
Kontakion of the Saints are sung with the one to the Mother of God.
After the blessing of the Kollyva the Priest enters the sanctuary, while
we begin Psalm 142 and the usual Lesser Blessing of water for the 1st of
the month is sung.\]

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

