\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](saintsof.md) \] \[ September \]
\[ [October](october.md) \] \[ [November](november.md) \]
\[ [December](december.md) \] \[ [January](january.md) \]
\[ [February](feb.md) \] \[ [June](june.md) \] \[ [July](july.md) \]
\[ [August](august.md) \]

MONTH OF SEPTEMBER

**It has 30 days. The day has 12 hours and the night 12 hours.**

**1.** **Beginning of the Indiction, that is of the New Year.**
Commemoration of our venerable father Symeon the Stylite; assembly of
the Mother of God of the Miasini. Commemoration of the martyr Aithalas,
and of the forty holy women and of Ammoun, the deacon and their teacher,
and of the holy martyrs Kallisti, Evodos and Hermogenes, sister and
brothers. Commemoration of Jesus the just, son of Navi; and memorial of
the great fire.

THE BEGINNING OF THE INDICTION. The Roman Emperors, for the maintenance
of their troops, decreed through a constitution a certain general
tribute on their subjects by every eparchy, the payment of which took
place yearly. The same constitution was repeated after an interval of
fifteen years, for the soldiers of Old Rome had the obligation to serve
in the army for fifteen years. After the completion of these they
renewed the constitution again, with some modification due to the
probable change of circumstances in the interval, and ordered afresh
another tribute, to be paid also in succession throughout the fifteen
year period. At the end of this period a third, and so forth. The
imperial constitution, through which this tribute was ordered a little
before the winter, was named *Indictio*, that is “decree”, or
“proclamation” concerning the tribute. Writing it “Indiction” the
Kings of Constantinople preserved the word, while the patriarchs in
later years employed the word *epinemesis,* which means “distribution”.
Indictions were introduced, according to the commoner view under
Augustus Caesar three years before Christ, and they produce as proof a
certain papal seal (*Bulla*), that is a papal constitution, issued in
the year 781 AD, which is dated as follows: *anno IV, Indictionis LIII*,
that is “in year 4 of the 53rd Indiction”, from which one can conclude
the year mentioned. By multiplying the 52 full Indictions and adding the
4 years of the 53rd one arrives at the number 784, that is 581 years
from Christ and 3 more.

There are three types of Indiction. The first is that introduced in the
West, which is called “imperial”, or “Caesarian” or “Constantinian”, and
it begins on the 24th of September. The second is called “papal” and
begins on the 1st of January. The 3rd, that of Constantinople, which the
Patriarchs of that city adopted after the fall of the Eastern Empire and
which they write in their own hand on constitutions issued by them,
without numbering the succession of Indictions or of the periods of 15
years. It begins, with a certain ceremony, from the 1st of September.
And this is the “Beginning of the Indiction”, and the reason for its
cycle of fifteen years.

But since, after the gathering of the crops into barns, there takes
place in a certain manner the completion of the whole year, and we begin
again from this time and onwards to sow seed anew into the earth for the
sake of the provision of new produce in the future, for this reason
September is reckoned to be the beginning of the new year. The Church,
as she celebrates today, asks of God “favourable weather”, seasonable
rains, “abundance of the earth” etc. That the ancient Synagogue of the
Jews also celebrated on this day the feast of Trumpets, offering to God
hymns of thanksgiving, holy Scripture is witness (Cf. Levit. 23:24-25.
Num. 29:1-2). There is a third reason for the present feast: the
remembrance of the entry of Jesus into the synagogue of the Jews at
Nazareth, when he was given the book of the Prophet Isaias to read, and
opening it he found the passage where it was written: “The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, therefore he has anointed me ”etc. (Luke 4:16-18). So
much for the present feast and the Indiction.

Of the Saints celebrated today Symeon was born about the year 392 in a
village called Sisan in the area of Cilicia and Syria. He entered the
monastic stadium from his youth. At first he was trained in a monastery,
later by himself in a desert place; and finally, opposite the mountains
of Syria, he climbed onto a high pillar, from which he was given the
name “Stylite”. He persevered on this for many years, standing upright
for the most part. He lived in all for 69 years and died in 461.

Jesus, son of Navi, was of the tribe of Ephraim. He was born in Egypt
around the year 1654 BC He succeeded Moses in the 85th year of his age.
He held back the flow of the Jordan and made the Israelites cross over
dryshod. When making war on the Jebusites he halted the course of the
sun. He partitioned the promised land between the twelve tribes of
Israelites and governed them for 25 years. He composed the book which
bears his name, the sixth book of the Old Testament. He lived in all 110
years and died in the year 1544 BC

The Great Fire took place in Constantinople, according to some on the
2nd of September 461, according to others in 468.

**No work and Permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion of the Indiction. Tone 2**.

Fashioner of all creation, who fix times and seasons by your own
authority, bless the crown of the year with your goodness, Lord,
preserving the Kings and your City in peace, at the intercessions of the
Mother of God, and save us.

**Of the Saint. Tone 1.**

You became a pillar of endurance, Venerable Saint, rivalling the
forefathers, Job in sufferings and Joseph in trials, and, while still in
the body, the life of the Bodiless ones. Our Venerable Father Symeon,
intercede with Christ our God that our souls may be saved.

**Of the Mother of God. Tone 7.**

Hail full of grace, Virgin Mother of God, harbour and protection of the
human race, for from you the Redeemer of the world became incarnate. For
you alone are Mother and Virgin, ever blessed and glorified. Intercede
with Christ our God to grant the whole world peace.

**Kontakion of the Indiction.  
Composed in the year 1813 by the revered Patriarch of Constantinople
Cyril VI.  
Tone 3.**

You created the universe in your ineffable wisdom, and fix the seasons
by your authority, grant victories to your Christ-loving people. May you
bless our goings and comings of the year, directing our works to your
divine will.

**Another Kontakion of the Indiction. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

Maker and Master of the ages, God of all things, truly beyond being,
bless the cycle of the year and save in your infinite mercy all those
who adore you, the only Master, and who cry out to you with fear, O
Redeemer: Grant to all a prosperous year.

**Another, of the Saint. Tone 2. Model Melody.**

Seeking things above and joined to things below, you made your column a
chariot of fire, through which you have become a companion of the
Angels, with them unceasingly imploring Christ our God on behalf of us
all.

2\. Of the holy martyr Mamas; and of our Father among the saints John
the Faster, Patriarch of Constantinople.

Mamas was from Gangra in Paphlagonia. He was born in prison, where his
parents died for the sake of Christ, and because he habitually called
his adoptive mother Ammia, “Mama”, he was named Mamas. He was martyred
in 272 or 273. John the Faster was patriarch under Tiberius II, from the
12th of April 582 until the 2nd of September 595, having governed the
Church for 13 years and almost five months. Under his patriarchate the
hitherto unaccustomed title “Ecumenical Patriarch” was employed for the
first time, by a certain local synod, about the year 586.

**Apolytikion of the Martyr. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate. \[Common\].**

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, Christ our
God, save our souls.

**Of the Hierarch. Tone 4. Model Melody. \[Common\]**

The truth of your actions proclaimed you to your flock as a rule of
faith, an image of meekness and a teacher of self-control; and you
gained through humility the things on high, through poverty riches,
Father and Hierarch John. Intercede with Christ our God that our souls
may be saved.

**Kontakion of the Martyr. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.**

With the staff given to you from God, shepherd your people to
life-bearing pastures; crush the invisible and ferocious wild beasts
beneath the feet of those who sing your praise; because we who are in
dangers have all gained you, Mamas, as a fervent protector.

3\. Of the holy Bishop-Martyr Anthimos, Bishop of Nikomedia; and of our
venerable father Theoktistos, fellow-ascetic of Efthymios the Great.

Anthimos underwent martyrdom under the tyrant Maximus in 311 \[or
Diocletian in 301\]. Theoktistos died around 651.

**Apolytikion of the Bishop Martyr. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

You shared their way of life and you succeeded to the Apostles’ thrones;
you found the practice, O God-inspired, to climb the heights of
contemplation; rightly proclaiming the word of truth; and in faith you
struggled to shedding of blood, Bishop and Martyr Anthimos; intercede
with Christ our God that our souls may be saved.

**Another. A composition by Anthimos IVth, Patriarch of
Constantinople.  
Tone 1.**

As valiant defender of your flock, inspired Father, you readily shed
your blood for it; you were not dismayed by the threats of the hostile,
and now you rejoice in heaven, as you stand by the throne of the
triple-sunned Godhead. Glory to Christ who gave you strength, glory to
your courage, glory, Anthimos, to your martyr’s valour.

**Of St Theoktistos. Tone 8. \[Common\]**

With the streams of your tears you cultivated the barren desert, and
with your deep groans your made your toils bring forth fruit a
hundredfold, and you have become a beacon, shining in all the world by
your wonders: Venerable Father Theoktistos, intercede with Christ our
God that our souls may be saved.

**Kontakion of the Hierarch. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

You were truly pre-eminent among priests, and you completed the road of
martyrdom, you quelled the cults of idols and became a champion for your
flock, O godly minded. And so it honours you as it mystically cries out:
Ever deliver me from dangers by your prayers, our Father Anthimos.

4\. Of the holy Bishop-martyr Babylas, patriarch of Antioch; and of the
holy Prophet Moses, who saw God.

Babylas was the twelfth patriarch of Antioch and successor to Zevinos or
Zenovios. He was martyred under Decius around the year 250. Moses, the
loftiest of philosophers, wisest of lawgivers and most ancient of
historians, was from the tribe of Levi, son of Abraham and Jochabed. He
was born in Egypt in the year 1689 BC As a babe he was put into a
basket, that is a box made out of papyrus and covered all over with
pitch. He was put onto the banks of the Nile because of the command and
the fear of Pharao. Taken from there by Pharao’s daughter he became her
adopted son and was brought up in the royal court for 40 years. Fleeing
from there to Madiam he saw at Mt Horeb the vision of the burning bush,
in about the 80th year of his life, when he was appointed by God as
leader of Israel, whom he led across the Red Sea as on dry land. He
governed Israel in the wilderness for forty years and performed many
signs and marvels. He composed the first five books of the Old
Testament, which are called the Pentateuch. Having reached the land of
Moab he ascended Mt Nebo to its summit, which is called Phasga, and
there, by divine command, he died in the year 1569 BC, having lived in
all for 120 years. His are the first two Odes from the Old Testament
which are sung in the office: *Let us sing to Lord*, etc., and *Attend,
O heaven, and I will speak*, etc. The first he sang by the shore of the
Red Sea immediately after the crossing and the other in the land of Moab
a few days before his death.

**Apolytikion of the Bishop Martyr. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

You shared their way of life and you succeeded to the Apostles’ thrones;
you found the practice, O God-inspired, to climb the heights of
contemplation; rightly directing the word of truth; and in faith you
struggled to shedding of blood, Bishop and Martyr Babylas; intercede
with Christ our God that our souls may be saved.

**Of the Prophet. Tone 2. Model Melody. \[Common\]**

As we celebrate the memory of your Prophet Moses, O Lord, through him we
beseech you: save our souls.

**Kontakion of the Hierarch. Tone 4. You have appeared today.**

When charged you guarded the mighty works of the faith in your heart,
Bishop and Martyr Babylas, servant of Christ, not quailing before the
tyrant; therefore keep us safe.

5\. Of the holy Prophet Zachary, father of the honoured Forerunner.

In the opinion of many in the Church, supported by ancient tradition,
the Jews murdered this Zachary, as the Lord said to them, between the
temple and the altar (Matt. 23:35) for two reasons: the first, that
after the conception by the Virgin Mary Zachary still called her
“Virgin” and numbered her among the virgins (Cf. St Basil, Sermon
for Christ’s Nativity). The other, that at the time of the Slaughter of
the Innocents (December 29th) his son John was not found, because the
aged Elizabeth took him, still a babe, and carefully concealed him,
precisely where is unknown, but certainly in the wilderness, where,
according to the Gospel “the child grew and became strong in spirit, and
he was in the wilderness until the day of his revelation to Israel”
(Luke 1:80). When the child could not be found the father was slain on
the order of Herod (Cf. Peter of Alexandria, Canon 13).

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.**

Clothed in the vestment of priesthood, wise Zachary, you offered in a
manner fitting a priest acceptable whole burnt offerings according to
the Law of God; and you became a beacon and one who contemplated
mysteries, manifestly bearing in yourself, O all-wise, the symbols of
grace. Slain by the sword in God’s temple, Prophet of Christ intercede,
with the Forerunner, that our souls may be saved.

**Kontakion. Tone 3. Today the Virgin.**

Today the Prophet and Priest of the Most High, Zachary, the parent of
the Forerunner, sets out a table of his memory, nourishing believers and
mixing for them a drink of righteousness. And so we praise him as a
godly initiate of God’s grace.

6\. Remembrance of the wonder performed at Colossae, that is Chonae, by
the Archangel Michael.

**Permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

Chief Captain of the heavenly armies, we the unworthy implore you to
protect us by your supplications with the shelter of the wings of your
immaterial glory, guarding us as we fall down and insistently cry out:
Deliver us from dangers, as Chief Captain of the Powers on high.

**Kontakion. Tone 2.**

Michael, who stand, all light, in the presence of the Trinity with all
the heavenly hosts, and with them raise the inspired song, and who at
God’s command pass through the whole earth and are marvelled at for
mighty wonders, do not cease to intercede for us all.

7\. Forefeast of the Nativity of the most holy Mother of God; and
commemoration of the holy Martyr Sozon.

St Sozon was martyred in Pompeioupolis in Cilicia under its governor,
Maximianus, around 288.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed.**

From Jesse’s root and from David’s loins Mary the child of God is being
born for us today; and so the universe rejoices and is renewed; heaven
rejoices together with earth. Praise her, families of the nations.
Joachim rejoices and Anne keeps festival as she cries: The barren gives
birth to the Mother of God, the nourisher of our life.

**Of the Martyr. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, Christ our
God, save our souls.

**Kontakion of the Forefeast. Tone 3.**

Today the Virgin and Mother of God, Mary, the untouched bridal chamber
of the heavenly Bridegroom is being brought to birth from barren womb by
God’s counsel, to be made ready as the chariot of the Word of God; for
to this she was predestined, the gate of God and Mother of true life.

**Of the Martyr. Tone 2.**

Assembled together let us all sing today with mighty voice the praise of
the true and godly-minded Martyr and tried athlete of piety, godlike
Sozon, initiate of grace, richest giver of healings; for he intercedes
to God for us all.

**8. The Nativity of Our Most Holy Lady, Mother of God and Ever-Virgin
Mary.**

According to the ancient tradition of the Church the Mother of God was
born by promise about 16 or 17 years before the Nativity of Christ of
barren and aged parents, Joachim and Anne. Joachim was descended from
the royal line of David, of the tribe of Juda, while Anne was of the
priestly tribe of Levi, daughter of the priest Matthan and Mary.

**No work, and Permission for Fish.**

**Apolytikion. Tone 4.**

Your Nativity, O Mother of God, has brought joy to all the inhabited
world; for from you there dawned the Sun of righteousness, Christ our
God. He abolished the curse and gave the blessing; and by making death
of no effect, he has bestowed on us eternal life.

**Kontakion. Tone 4.**

Joachim and Anne were set free from the reproach of childlessness, Adam
and Eve from corruption of death by your holy Nativity, O Immaculate.
Delivered from the guilt of offences, your people celebrate it as they
cry to you: The barren woman bears the Mother of God, the sustainer of
our souls.

9\. Of the holy and righteous Forebears of God, Joachim and Anne; and of
the holy Martyr Severianos.

Severianos suffered under the Emperor Licinius and Duke Lucius in
Sevasteia around 313.

**Today there takes place the Autumn Equinox \[By the old calendar\].**

**Permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion of the Feast; and of the Saints. Tone 2.**

As we celebrate the memory of your righteous Forebears, O Lord, through
them we implore you: save our souls.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.**

Now Anne rejoices, freed from the bonds of sterility, and nourishes the
All-immaculate, as she summons all to sing the praise of the One who
from her womb bestowed on mortals the only Mother who has not known man.

10\. Of the holy Martyrs Minodora, Mitrodora and Nymphodora.

They were from Bithynia, sisters according to the flesh, and they
suffered under Maximianus in the year 304, not far from the hot springs
of Pithioi.

**Apolytikion of the Feast.**

**Kontakion of the Saints. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

Contesting valiantly for the Trinity you routed the foe of many wiles,
bound together as sisters in spirit; therefore you have made your home
with the five Virgins in the heavenly bridal chamber, O Champions, and
with joy you stand with the Angels before the universal King.

11\. Of our venerable mother Theodora of Alexandria.

She lived in the reign of Zeno, in 472. Changing her name to Theodore
and dressing as a man she lived in a male monastery unrecognised until
her death.

**Apolytikion of the Feast, and of the Saint. Tone 8. Model Melody.**

In you, Mother, was preserved unimpaired that which is according to the
image, for you took up the cross, and you followed Christ; and by your
deeds you have taught us to despise the flesh, for it passes away; but
to care for the soul, which is a thing immortal; and therefore your
spirit, holy Theodora, rejoices with the Angels.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.**

You wore down your body by fasts, by vigils and by prayers, entreating
the Lord to receive perfect pardon of your sin; which you truly
obtained, having shown the way of repentance.

12\. Of the holy Bishop and Martyr Autonomos.

He was a bishop in Italy, and suffered under Diocletian at Sorea on the
gulf of Nikomedia in 298.

**(His office is sung on the 11th, because today is the Leave-taking of
the Nativity of the Mother of God.)**

**Kontakion of the Saint. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.**

With reverence you celebrated the divine mysteries, wise Father; you
became an acceptable sacrifice, all-blessed Martyr Automos. For you
drank Christ’s cup, and now, as you stand in his presence, you intercede
for us all.

13\. **Dedication of the Church of the holy Resurrection of Christ our
God**; pre-feast of the precious and life-giving Cross; and
commemoration of the holy Bishop-martyr Cornelius the Centurion.

This Church, the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, which is especially
honoured by all the faithful, is the one which Constantine the Great
erected on the site of Golgotha, where the Saviour was crucified and
buried. A long time ago it was purposely obliterated by the Jews and
pagans, while under Hadrian Aelius a pagan shrine of Aphrodite was
erected on the site, for the greater desecration and total obliteration
of the sacred spot. Here too the precious Cross was hidden; but after
excavations had taken place on the order of the devout Emperor, the
symbols of the saving passion were discovered. On this site then there
was built a very large and outstandingly beautiful church dedicated to
the life-bearing Resurrection of Christ our God, under the direction of
the blessed Helen, of Drakilianos, the governor of Palestine, and
Makarios, the then patriarch of Jerusalem, who elevated the precious
Cross (September 14) and celebrated the dedication of this church about
the year 330.

Cornelius was Roman by birth, pagan by religion, centurion by rank. He
lived in Caesarea in Palestine, a man devout and godfearing, giving many
alms to the people and praying to God at all times. About the year 41 he
saw a vision of an angel and sent and invited the Apostle Peter from
Joppa, by whom he was instructed in belief in Christ and was baptised
with all his household. He was the first fruits of the pagans. It is
said that after this he was appointed bishop, according to some of
Caesarea itself, according to others of Skepsis not far from the Troad,
and that he died a martyr’s death.

**Permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion of the Dedication. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

You have displayed the loveliness of the holy dwelling of your glory
below, O Lord, as you have the beauty of the firmament above. Strengthen
it for ever and ever and accept our supplications which are ceaselessly
offered you in it, through the prayers of the Mother of God, the life
and resurrection of all.

**Of the Cross. Tone 2.**

We bring you in intercession the life-giving Cross of your goodness, O
Lord, which you have given to the unworthy. Save the Sovereigns and your
City, giving them peace through the Mother of God, O only lover of
mankind.

**Kontakion of the Dedication. Tone 4. You have appeared today.**

The Church has been declared a heaven filled with light, which guides
all the faithful to the light. Standing in it we cry: Establish this
house, O Lord.

**And of the Saint. The same melody.**

The Church received you as the holy first fruits of the nations,
enlightening her by your virtuous deeds, godly Cornelius, initiator into
sacred mysteries.

**14. The Universal Exaltation of the Precious and Life-giving Cross.**

The blessed Helen, mother of Constantine the Great, looked for the Cross
in Jerusalem and found it buried in the earth about the year 325. Then
the people, seeing it elevated on the ambo by the then patriarch of
Jerusalem Makarios, cried out, “Lord, have mercy\!” Note that after its
finding part of the precious Cross was taken to Constantinople as a
blessing, while the rest was left in Jerusalem. There it remained until
the year 614, when the Persians, ravaging Palestine, took it back to
their own country (January 22nd). But later, in the year 628, Herakleios
led an army against them, took the precious Cross back again and brought
it to Constantinople.

**No work, and Fast, on whatever day it falls.**

**Apolytikion. Tone 1.**

Lord, save your people and bless your inheritance; granting to faithful
Christians victories over their enemies, and protecting your
commonwealth by your Cross.

**Kontakion. Tone 4. Model Melody.**

Lifted up on the Cross of your own will, to the new commonwealth that
bears your name grant your mercies, Christ our God; make your faithful
people glad by your power, giving them victories over their enemies; may
they have your help in battle: a weapon of peace, an invincible trophy.

15\. Of the holy martyr Niketas.

He was martyred under Athenarichos, leader of the Goths beyond the
Danube, in the year 330, in the time of Constantine the Great.

**Apolytikion of the Feast; and of the Martyr. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

Your Martyr, O Lord, by his struggle obtained the crown of incorruption
from you, our God; for with your might he destroyed tyrants, and
shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at his prayers, Christ our
God, save our souls.

**Kontakion of the Saint. Tone 2. Seeking things above.**

Having cut off the might of error by your resistance, and by your
struggles received the crown of victory, whose name you bear, glorious
Niketas, you rejoice with the Angels, as with them you intercede
unceasingly with Christ for us all.

16\. Of the holy martyr Efphemia, the all-famed.

She was from Chalcedon and passed her life in virginity in the days of
Diocletian, by whom she underwent a martyr’s death in 303, or according
to others in 307. Her sacred remains are preserved in the patriarchate
in Constantinople.

**Apolytikia: of the Feast**

**And of the Saint. Tone 4. Joseph was amazed. \[Common\]**

O Jesu, your lamb cries aloud: O my Bridegroom, I long for you; and
seeking you I struggle, and I am crucified and buried with you in your
baptism; and I suffer for your sake, that I may reign with you; and I
die for you, that I may live in you; but as a spotless victim now accept
one who with longing is slain for you. Through her prayers, as you are
merciful, save our souls\!

**Kontakion. Tone 4. Lifted up on the Cross.**

In your struggle you fought well, and after death you hallow us with
streams of healings, O all-praised. Therefore we honour your holy
falling asleep, as we stand with faith around your honoured relics, that
we may be delivered from diseases of the soul and draw out the grace of
wonders.

17\. Of the holy martyr Sophia \[Wisdom\], and her three daughters
Faith, Hope and Charity.

They were from Rome and suffered martyrdom about the year 126 under
Hadrian.

**Apolytikion of the Feast.**

**Kontakion of the Saints. Tone 1. The soldiers watching.**

Revealed as most sacred branches of holy Wisdom, Faith, Hope and Charity
by grace turned the wisdom of the Greeks to folly; and having struggled
and been revealed as victors they were wreathed with an incorruptible
crown by Christ the Master of all things.

18\. Of our venerable father Evmenios, Bishop of Gortyna, the
wonder-worker; and of the holy martyr Ariadne.

**Apolytikion and Kontakion of the Feast.**

19\. Of the holy Martyrs Trophimos, Savvatios and Dorymedon.

The were martyred in the reign of Probus about the year 278; Savvatios
in Antioch, the other two in Synnadoi of Phrygia.

**Apolytikion of the Feast.**

**Kontakion of the Saints. Tone 4. You have appeared today.**

Revealed as a river filled with the gifts of grace of the Holy Spirit,
you water the inhabited world, O Athletes, with the fair streams of your
wonders.

20\. Of the holy great martyr Efstathios and of Theopisti, his wife, and
their two sons, Agapios and Theopistos.

They were martyred under Hadrian in around 120.

**Permission for wine and oil.**

**Apolytikia of the Feast; and of the Saints. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, Christ our God, save our souls.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things above.**

Having clearly imitated the sufferings of Christ, and drunk faithfully
of his cup, you have become also a fellow heir of his glory, from him
who is God of all receiving from on high, divine forgiveness.

21\. Of the holy Apostle Quadratus of Magnesia, and of the holy Prophet
Jonas.

Quadratus was a disciple of the Apostles and became Bishop of Athens. He
was martyred under Hadrian in 117, though according to others somewhat
later under Aurelius.

Jonas was son of Amathi, from the city of Gethchopher, or Geth-Opher (4
Kingd.14:25), of the tribe of Zabulon. He prophesied around 838-810 BC.
God ordered him to leave for Nineve, the capital of the Assyrians and to
preach its imminent overthrow, because of the sins of its citizens. But
Jonas disobeyed the divine command and taking ship departed elsewhere.
The sudden and dreadful tumult of the sea and the revelation of Jonas’
disobedience compelled the sailors to throw him overboard. A great
whale, at once made ready by divine foreknowledge, swallowed him down.
He spent three days and nights in its belly, where he prayed, saying the
sixth ode of the canon: *I cried to the Lord my God in my distress*,
etc. Afterwards the whale vomited him up onto dry land, and once again
God’s former command came to him. And so he departed and preached,
saying, ‘Yet three days and Ninive will be destroyed’. At this the
people were terrified; all repented; they fasted, great, small, babes at
the breast and even the animals; and in this way they appeased God and
escaped his wrath. The prophecy of Jonas is divided into four chapters,
and is ranked fifth among the Twelve Minor Prophets. His three day
sojourn in the belly of the whale is an image of the three day burial
and life-bringing resurrection of the Saviour (Matt.12:39-40).

**(On this day we take leave of the feast of the life-giving Cross and
everything is sung of the feast. The office of the Apostle is sung on
the 22nd.)**

22\. Of the holy Bishop-martyr Phokas, bishop of Sinope.

He was martyred under the Emperor Trajan in 102.

**Apolytikia: of the Apostle. Tone 3. \[Common\]**

O holy Apostle Quadratus, intercede with the merciful God to grant our
souls forgiveness of sins.

**Of the Bishop-martyr. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

You shared their way of life and you succeeded to the Apostles’ thrones;
you found the practice, O God-inspired, to climb the heights of
contemplation; rightly proclaiming the word of truth; and in faith you
struggled to shedding of blood, Bishop and Martyr Phokas; intercede with
Christ our God that our souls may be saved.

**Kontakion of the Apostle. Tone 8. As first fruits of nature.**

The inhabited world brings you the Apostle Quadratus, Lord, as an
honoured high priest and valiant athlete; and with hymns it honours his
revered memory, asking always that through him forgiveness of faults may
be bestowed on those who sing, ‘Alleluia’.

23\. **The Conception of the honourable and glorious Prophet, Forerunner
and Baptist John.**

This took place 15 months before the nativity of Christ, after the
vision of the Angel, which the Forerunner’s father Zachary saw in the
temple of the Lord, as he was officiating in the order of his course,
during the feast of Tabernacles (Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost) according
to tradition. In this vision the Angel Gabriel appeared and said to
Zachary, ‘You supplication has been heard and your wife Elizabeth will
bear you a son, and you are to call his name John’. But Zachary, aware
of his Elizabeth’s barrenness and that they were both well advanced in
years, did not believe the Angel’s words; and so he was condemned by him
to remain silent and dumb until the words were fulfilled in their time.
And so it came to pass (Lk.1:7-24. See also June 24th).

**The Autumn Equinox occurs today \[by the new calendar\].**

**Permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.**

Be glad, O barren one, who before did not bear child, for see, you have
conceived for the sun a lamp that is going to enlighten the whole
inhabited world, sick with blindness. Dance Zachary, cry aloud with
boldness, ‘The one to be born is a Prophet of the Most High\!’

**Kontakion. Tone 1. The soldiers watching.**

Great Zachary, with far-famed Elizabeth his wife, is radiantly glad, for
worthily she conceives John the Forerunner, whom an Archangel announced
rejoicing, and whom we humans fittingly honour as a initiate of God’s
grace.

24\. Of the holy Protomartyr and Equal of the Apostles Thekla.

She was from the city of Iconium; she was taught the faith at the age of
18 by the apostle Paul, whom she followed, proclaiming Christ in
different cities, and after having suffered greatly she died in her own
homeland at the age of ninety.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

O Jesu, your lamb cries aloud: O my Bridegroom, I long for you; and
seeking you I struggle, and I am crucified and buried with you in your
baptism; and I suffer for your sake, that I may reign with you; and I
die for you, that I may live in you; but as a spotless victim now accept
one who with longing is slain for you. Through her prayers, as you are
merciful, save our souls\!

**Kontakion. Tone 8. As first fruits of nature.**

You shone forth with the beauty of virginity, you were adorned with the
crown of martyrdom, entrusted with the work of an apostle, glorious
Virgin. As first woman martyr you changed the flame of the fire to dew,
while you tamed the raging of the bull by your prayer.

25\. Of our venerable Mother Euphrosyne.

She was born in the reign of Theodosios the Less in 410, daughter of one
Paphnutios. She escaped him, and, having changed her name to Smaragdos,
as a royal eunuch in man’s clothing she entered a male monastery, where
she lived unrecognised for 38 years.

**Apolytikion. Tone 8. \[Common\]**

In you, Mother, was preserved unimpaired that which is according to the
image, for you took up the cross, and you followed Christ; and by your
deeds you have taught us to despise the flesh, for it passes away; but
to care for the soul, which is a thing immortal; and therefore your
spirit, holy Euphrosyne, rejoices with the Angels.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Seeking things on high.**

Longing to attain the life above you readily forsook the delight below,
and merged yourself among men, O all-revered. For the sake of Christ
your Bridegroom, you spurned an earthly suitor.

**26. The passing of the holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Divine.**

He was from Bethsaida in Galilee, son of Zebedee and Salome, brother of
James the great, formerly a fisherman by trade, later an Apostle,
beloved disciple and bosom friend of Christ. Alone of the other
disciples he followed him to the Cross, when he was also entrusted with
the Virgin, as another son to her and true brother of the teacher Jesus.
After this he preached him to all Asia, and especially to Ephesus. When
the second persecution of the Christians was launched by Domitian, he
was taken bound from Asia to Rome, and there he was cast into a cauldron
of boiling oil. Removed from it unharmed he was exiled to Patmos, where
he wrote the Apocalypse. Returning to Ephesus after the tyrant’s death,
he, last of the other evangelists, wrote the Gospel in his name and his
three General Epistles; and when he had lived altogether about 95 years
he fell asleep in peace under Trajan in the year 100. He was surnamed
the Theologian because he “theologised” \[i.e. contemplated\] the
ineffable eternal generation of the Son and Word of God the Father; for
this reason there is depicted in his icon the form of an eagle, one of
the four symbolic living creatures which the Prophet Ezekiel saw (1:10).

**No work and permission for Wine and Oil.**

**Apolytikion. Tone 2.**

Beloved Apostle of Christ our God, hasten, deliver a people without
defence. As he accepted that you lean upon his breast, he accepts you as
you fall before him. Implore him, O Theologian, and scatter the
persistent cloud of nations, asking for us peace and his great mercy.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Model Melody.**

Who will recount your mighty works, O Virgin, for you pour out wonders
and are a source of healings, and you intercede on behalf of our souls,
as Theologian and friend of Christ.

27\. Of the holy martyr Kallistratos and of his forty-nine fellow
martyrs.

They were martyred in the reign of Diocletian, in the year 288.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants, and shattered the feeble insolence of the demons: at their
prayers, Christ our God, save our souls.

**Kontakion. Tone 4. You have appeared today.**

The Church to-day honours you all, O Saints, as it offers you spiritual
praise, for you struggled on its behalf, godly, victorious, all-wise
Martyrs.

28\. Of our venerable and confessor Chariton; and of the holy Prophet
Baruch.

Chariton was from the city of Iconium in the time of Aurelian, around
274.

Baruch was son of Nerias, disciple and secretary of the prophet Jeremy
(36:4). He composed his own prophecy, which is preserved in five
chapters, in the fifth year of the captivity of the Jews in Babylon
under Sedekias, 583 BC. A section from the prophecy of Baruch is read at
vespers on Christmas Day, under the name of Jeremy, starting at 3:35 and
ending at 4:4.

**Of the Ascetic. Tone 8. \[Common\]**

With the streams of your tears you cultivated the barren desert, and
with your deep groans your made your toils bring forth fruit a
hundredfold, and you have become a beacon, shining in all the world by
your wonders: Venerable Father Chariton, intercede with Christ our God
that our souls may be saved.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. Nor tomb nor death.**

Taking your delight in self-mastery, inspired Father, and bridling the
desires of the flesh, you were seen growing by faith; and you flowered
like the tree of life in the midst of Eden, all-blessed, most holy
Chariton.

29\. Of our venerable father Kyriakos the anchorite.

He was born in Corinth around 300; he lived as a monk in Palestine,
under Efthymios the Great; he lived for 107 years and died in 408.

**Apolytikion. Tone 1. Model melody.**

Citizen of the desert and angel embodied, and wonder-worker you have
been declared. O God-bearing father Kyriakos; by fasting and by vigil
and by prayer receiving gifts of grace from heaven; you heal the sick
and the souls of those who have recourse to you in faith. Glory to him
who gave you strength; glory to him who crowned you; glory to him who
through you works healing for all.

**Kontakion. Tone 8. To you my Champion.**

The sacred Lavra, which honours you each day, celebrates each year your
memorial as its mighty champion and helper. But as you have boldness
towards the Lord, from foes that assail protect us, that we may cry to
you, ‘Hail, Father thrice-blessed\!’

30\. Of the holy Bishop-martyr Gregory, bishop of Great Armenia.

He was son of Anak, a Parthian by race, born around 240 and taught the
faith in Christ at Caesarea in Cappadocia. He was ordained bishop by
Leontios, archbishop of Caesarea. He endured many tortures from
Tiridates, the ruler of Armenia. He brought tens of thousands of
Armenians to the true religion, including Tiridates himself. He died
ascetically around 325.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. \[Common\]**

You shared their way of life and you succeeded to the Apostles’ thrones;
you found the action, O God-inspired, to climb the heights of
contemplation; rightly directing the word of truth; and in faith you
struggled to shedding of blood, Bishop and Martyr Gregory; intercede
with Christ our God that our souls may be saved.

**Kontakion. Tone 2.**

Let us the faithful praise today in godly hymns and songs the far-famed
High Priest as an athlete for the truth, Gregory, the watchful shepherd
and teacher, the universal beacon; for he intercedes with Christ that we
may be saved.

APPENDIX

1\. Day of Intercession for the Environment.

**Apolytikion. Tone 4. Speedily anticipate.**

Lord and Saviour, who as God brought all things into being by a word,
establishing laws and governing them unerringly to your glory, at the
prayers of the Mother of God, keep secure and unharmed all the elements
which hold the earth together, and save the universe.

**Kontakion. Tone 2. With your blood.**

With your all-powerful strength you framed all things, both visible and
invisible; and so keep unharmed, we implore your goodness, the
environment that surrounds the earth.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

