\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](readLent.md) \]
\[ [First Week](first.md) \] \[ [Second Week](second_week.md) \]
\[ [Third Week](third.md) \] \[ [Fourth Week](fourth.md) \]
\[ [Fifth Week](fifth.md) \] \[ Sixth Week \]

**on monday before palm sunday**

## at the trithekti

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 6.

This is the fearful day, O God, whose the evening we did not hope to
reach; yet in your love for humankind you have counted us worthy to see
it. \* Thrice-Holy One, glory to you\!

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 104.

Let the heart of those \* who seek the Lord be glad.

Verse:* *Give thanks to the Lord, and call upon his Name.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[48,17–22 & 49,1–4\]

Thus says the Lord, who delivered you, the Holy One of Israel: I am your
God, I have shown how to find the way by which you should go. And if you
had listened to my commandments, your peace would have been like a
river, and your justice like the waves of the sea; your progeny would
have been like the sand, and offspring of your womb like the dust of the
earth; now you would never be cut off or your name destroyed from before
me. Go forth from Babylon, as you flee from the Chaldeans; declare this
with a shout of joy, let this be heard; proclaim it to the end of the
earth; say, ‘The Lord has delivered his servant Jacob\!’ And if they
thirst, he will bring them through the desert; he will bring water out
of the rock for them; the rock will be split open and water will gush
out, and my people will drink. There is no joy, says the Lord, for the
ungodly. \[49,1\] Listen to me, you islands, and attend, you nations.
For a long time he will stand, says the Lord. He called my name from my
mother’s womb and made my mouth like a sharp sword and hid me in the
shadow of his hand; he made me like a chosen arrow, he hid me in his
quiver. And he said to me, ‘You are my servant, Israel, and in you I
will be glorified.’ But I said, ‘I have laboured in vain, I have given
my strength for nothing and for futility; therefore my judgement is from
the Lord, and my toil before my God.’

Prokeimenon in the 6th Tone. Psalm 105.

Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel \* from age to age.

Verse:* *Give thanks to the Lord for he is good, for his mercy is for
ever.

## **at vespers**

Prokeimenon in the 3rd Tone. Psalm 106.

Give thanks to the Lord for he is good, \* for his mercy is for ever.

Verse:* *Let the redeemed of the Lord say it, whom he redeemed from the
hand of the foe.

The Reading is from Genesis.  
\[27,1–41\]

It came to pass that when Isaac was old and his eyes had become dim so
that he could not see, he called Esau his elder son, and said to him,
‘My son’; and he answered, ‘Here I am.’ He said, ‘See, I have grown
old and I do not know the day of my death. Now then, take your
equipment, your quiver and your bow, and go out to the field, and hunt
game for me, and prepare for me savoury food, such as I love, and bring
it to me that I may eat; that my soul bless you before I die.’ But
Rebecca heard Isaac speaking to his son Esau. Esau went to the field to
hunt for game for his father. But Rebecca said to her son Jacob, the
younger, ‘See, I heard your father speaking to your brother Esau,
saying, “Bring me game, and prepare for me savoury food, that I may eat
it, and bless you before the Lord before I die.” Now therefore, my son,
hear me as I command you. Go to the flock, and from there fetch me two
fine, tender kids, and I will make them into savoury food for your
father, such as he loves; and you shall bring it to your father to eat,
so that your father may bless you before he dies.’ But Jacob said to
Rebecca his mother, ‘My brother Esau is a hairy man, while I am a smooth
man. Perhaps my father will feel me, and I shall seem to be mocking him,
and bring a curse upon myself and not a blessing.’ His mother said to
him, ‘Upon me be your curse, my child; only obey my word, and go, bring
them to me.’ So he went and took them and brought them to his mother;
and his mother prepared savoury food, such as his father loved. Then
Rebecca took the best garments of Esau her elder son, the best ones
which were by her in the house, and put them on Jacob her younger son;
and the skins of the kids she put upon his arms and upon the exposed
part of his neck; and she gave the savoury food and the loaves, which
she had prepared, into the hands of her son Jacob. So he took them in to
his father. And he said, ‘Father’; and he said, ‘Here I am; who are you,
my child?’ Jacob said to his father, ‘I am Esau your first-born. I have
done as you commanded me me; now arise, sit up and eat of my game, that
your soul may bless me.’ But Isaac said to his son, ‘How is that you
have found so quickly, my child?’ He answered, ‘What the Lord your God
put before me.’ Then Isaac said to Jacob, ‘Come near, that I may feel
you, my son, to know whether you are my son Esau or not.’ So Jacob went
near to Isaac his father, who felt him and said, ‘The voice is the voice
of Jacob, but the hands are the hands of Esau.’ And he did not recognize
him, because his hands were hairy like his brother Esau’s hands; so he
blessed him, and said, ‘Are you my son Esau?’ He answered, ‘I am.’ Then
he said, ‘Bring it to me, and I will eat of your game, my
child,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) that my soul may bless you.’ So he brought it to
him, and he ate; and he brought him wine, and he drank. Then his father
Isaac said to him, ‘Come near and kiss me, my child.’ So he came near
and kissed him; and he smelt the smell of his garments, and blessed him,
and said, ‘See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a full field
which the Lord has blessed\! May God give you of the dew of heaven, and
of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine. Let nations
serve you, and rulers bow down to you. Be lord over your brother, and
your father’s sons will bow down to you. The one who curses you is
cursed, and the one who blesses you is blessed.’ And it came to pass
after Isaac had finished blessing Jacob his son, when Jacob had gone out
from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in
from his hunting. He also prepared savoury food, and brought it to his
father. And he said to his father, ‘Let my father arise, and eat of his
son’s game, that your soul may bless me.’ His father Isaac said to him,
‘Who are you?’ He answered, ‘I am your son, your first-born, Esau.’
Then Isaac was greatly amazed, and said, ‘Who was it then that hunted
game for me and brought it to me, and I ate of all of it before you
came, and I have blessed him? And he shall be blessed.’ When Esau heard
his father Isaac’s words, he cried out with an great and bitter cry, and
said to his father, ‘Bless me also, father\!’ But he said, ‘Your brother
came with guile, and took your blessing.’ Esau said, ‘Rightly he was
named Jacob? For see he has supplanted me this second time. He took my
birthright; and now he has taken my blessing.’ Then Esau said to his
father, ‘Have you not a blessing left for me, father?’ Isaac answered
Esau, ‘If I have made him your lord, and all his brothers his servants,
and with corn and wine I have sustained him, what then can I do for you,
my son?’ Esau said to his father, ‘Have you only one blessing, father?
Bless me also, father.’ But Isaac was stunned[\[2\]](#_ftn2) and Esau
lifted up his voice and wept. Then Isaac his father answered him and
said, ‘See, away from[\[3\]](#_ftn3) the fatness of the earth shall your
dwelling be, and away from the dew of heaven from on high. And you shall
live by your sword, and you shall serve your brother; but the time will
come when you will destroy and loose his yoke from your neck.’ And Esau
hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father had blessed
him.’

Prokeimenon in the 7th Tone. Psalm 107.

Be exalted, O God, above the heavens, \* and your glory over all the
earth.

Verse:* *My heart is ready, O God, my heart is ready. I will sing and
chant with my glory.

The Reading is from Proverbs.  
\[19,16–25\]

One who keeps a commandment guards their own life; but one who despises
their own ways will perish. One who is merciful to the poor lends to the
Lord, and he will repay him in accordance with his gift. Discipline your
son for thus there will be good hope; do not be exalted in your soul to
arrogance. A man who thinks evil will pay a great penalty; and if he
commits injury he will lose his life. Listen, my son, to the instruction
of your father, that you may become wise at your last days. Many are the
thoughts in the heart of a man, but the purpose of the Lord endures for
ever. Acts of mercy are fruit for a man, while a just beggar is better
than a rich liar. The fear of the Lord leads to life for a man; but one
without fear will encamp in places which knowledge does not visit. One
who hides his hands in his bosom unjustly, will not even bring them to
his mouth. When the pestilent is scourged, a fool becomes more astute.
But if your chastise a prudent man, he will understand knowledge.

# on tuesday before palm sunday

## at the trithekti

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 5.

You have given our City an invincible wall: the Virgin who gave you
birth. \* Through her we pray, O Saviour, rescue our souls from the
evils that surround us.

Prokeimenon in the 8th Tone. Psalm 108.

Help me, Lord my God, \* and save me in accordance with your mercy.

Verse:* *O God do not be silent at my praise, for the mouth of sinner
and trickster has been opened against me.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[49,6–10\]

Thus says the Lord, I have given you as a covenant for a race, as a
light for nations, for you to be as salvation to the end of the earth.
Thus says the Lord, who delivered you, the God of Israel, ‘Sanctify the
one who despises his soul, who is abhorred by the nations, the slave of
rulers. Kings shall see him and arise; rulers, and they shall worship
him, because of the Lord; for the Holy One of Israel is faithful, and he
chose you.’ Thus says the Lord, ‘In an acceptable time I heard you, in a
day of salvation I helped you. And I fashioned you I and gave you as a
covenant for nations, to establish the land, to apportion desolate
heritages, saying to the prisoners, ‘Come out,’ to those who are in
darkness, ‘Be revealed.’ They shall feed along all the ways, on all the
paths shall be their pasture. They shall not hunger or thirst, neither
scorching wind nor sun shall smite them, for he who has mercy on them
will comfort them, and through springs of water he will lead them.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 109.

You are a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedek.

Verse:* *The Lord said to my lord, Sit at my right hand, until I make
your enemies a footstool for your feet.

**at vespers**

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 110.

The fear of the Lord \* is the beginning of wisdom.

Verse:* *I will give thanks to, O Lord, with my whole heart, in the
council of the upright and in the congregation.

The Reading is from Genesis.  
\[31,3–16\]

The Lord said to Jacob, ‘Return to the land of your father and to your
kindred, and I will be with you.’ So Jacob sent and called Rachel and
Leia into the field where his flocks were, and said to them, ‘I see that
your father’s face, it is not as it was towards me yesterday and the day
before. But the God of my father has been with me. You know that I have
served your father with all my strength; yet your father has cheated me
and changed my wages of ten lambs, but God did not permit him to harm
me. If he said, “The spotted shall be your wages,” then all the sheep
bore spotted; and if he said, “The white shall be your wages,” then all
the sheep bore white. Thus God has taken away the your father’s animals,
and given them to me. And it came to pass, when the sheep had conceived
and were with young, with my eyes I saw in a dream that the he-goats and
rams mounting the ewes and the she-goats were striped, spotted, and
mottled with ash-coloured spots. Then the angel of God said to me in the
dream, ’Jacob, Jacob’, and I said, ’Here I am\! What is it?’ And he
said, ’With your eyes look up and see, the he-goats and rams that mount
ewes and she-goats are striped, spotted, and mottled; for I have seen
all that Laban is doing to you. I am the God who appeared to you in
God’s place, where you anointed a pillar to me and made a vow to me.
Now therefore arise, go forth from this land, and return to the land of
your birth.’’’ Then Rachel and Leia answered and said to him, ‘Is there
any part or inheritance left to us in our father’s house? Are we not
reckoned by him as foreigners? For he has sold us, and he has been
devoured the money given for us. All the wealth and glory which God has
taken away from our father shall be for us and our children. Now
therefore, do whatever God has told you.’

Prokeimenon in the 4th Tone. Psalm 111.

He is merciful, compassionate and just.

Verse: Blessed is the man who fears the Lord, he will delight greatly in
his commandments.

The Reading is from Proverbs.  
\[21:3-21\]

My son, to do what is just and to speak truth is more pleasing to God
than the blood of sacrifices. A haughty man is arrogant-hearted in his
** pride; while the lamp of the ungodly is sin. One that gathers
treasures with a lying tongue pursues futility and goes ** towards the
snare of death. Destruction shall lodge with the ungodly; for they are
unwilling to do what is just. To the crooked God sends crooked ways; for
his works are pure and right. Better to dwell in a corner under the sky,
than in stuccoed * *walls with injustice, and in a shared house. The
soul of the ungodly will not be pitied by anyone. When a dissolute
person is punished the guileless becomes cleverer: while a wise one who
understands will receive knowledge. A just person understands the hearts
of the ungodly: and despises the ungodly in their wicked deeds. One that
stops his ears from hearing the weak, will cry out himself, and there
shall be no one to listen. A secret gift turns away anger: but one who
refrains from giving rouses strong wrath. The joy of the just to do
judgement: but a holy person ** is unclean to evil-doers. A man who
strays from the way of justice, will rest in the congregation of
giants.[\[4\]](#_ftn4) A poor man loves joy, making friends of wine and
oil in abundance; while a transgressor is an off-scouring of a just one.
It is  better to dwell in a desert land than with a quarrelsome,
talkative and quick-tempered woman. A desirable treasure will rest on
the mouth of the wise; but foolish men will swallow it up. The way of
justice and mercy will find life and glory.

**ON WEDNESDAY BEFORE PALM SUNDAY**

## AT THE TRITHEKTI

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 5.

Act with mercy towards us, Lord, and do not hand us over to our
iniquities, holy Master almighty, we beg you.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 112.

Praise the Lord, young people, praise the name of the Lord.

Verse: May the name of the Lord be blessed from now and for ever more.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[58:1-11\]

Thus says the Lord: Cry aloud, and spare not; lift up your voice like a
trumpet, and declare to my people their sins, and to the house of Jacob
their iniquities. Day by day they seek me, and desire to know my ways;
like a people that had done justice, and had not abandoned the judgment
of their God, they now ask me for just judgment, and desire to draw near
to God, saying, Why have we fasted, and you did not see? Humbled our
souls, and you did not know? Because, in the days of your fasts you find
your wishes, and all those under your power you goad. If you fast for
quarrels and fights, and smite the humble with your ** fists, why do you
fast for me as you do today, for your voice to be heard be heard in your
cry? I did not choose this fast, nor a day for a person to humble their
soul. Even if you bend down your neck like a ring, and spread under you
sackcloth and ashes, you shall not because of this call it an acceptable
fast. I did not choose such a fast, says the Lord. But untie every bond
of iniquity, unfasten the knots of hard bargains, send the bruised away
with remission, and cancel every unjust account. Break your bread for
the hungry, and lead the poor who have no shelter into your house: if
you see someone naked, clothe them, and you are not to disregard the
relations of your own seed. Then your light will break forth as the
morning, and your healing speedily spring forth: and your justice will
go before you, and the glory of God will surround you. Then you will
cry, and God will hear you; while you are still speaking he will say,
Behold, I am here. If you remove the bond from yourself, and the
stretching out of the hands, and murmuring speech; and if you give bread
to the hungry from your soul, and satisfy the humbled soul; then your
light will spring up in darkness, and your darkness will be ** as
noon-day: and your God will be with you continually.

Prokeimenon. Tone 6. Psalm 113.

You are blessed by the Lord who made heaven and earth.

Verse:* *At Israel’s departure from Egypt, of Jacob’s house from a
barbarian people, Judea became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion.

**AT VESPERS**

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 114.

I will be well pleasing to the Lord in the land of the living.

Verse:* *I have loved because the Lord will listen to the voice of my
supplication.

The Reading is from Genesis.  
\[43:26-31 and 45:1-16\]

And the brothers brought Joseph the gifts which they had in their hands,
into the house; and they prostrated before him with their faces to the
ground. But he asked them, ’How are you?’ and he said to them, ’Is your
father, the old man of whom you spoke, well? Is he still alive?’ And
they said, ’Your servant our father is well. He is still alive.’ And he
said, ’That man is blessed by God’.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)  And bowing down,
they prostrated before him. And Joseph, lifting up his eyes, saw his
brother Benjamin, born of the same mother, and said, ’Is this your
younger brother, whom you said you would bring to me? ’ and he said,
’God have mercy on you, my child.’ And Joseph was deeply troubled, for
so strong was the affection he felt for his brother that he wanted to
weep; and he went into his private chamber, and wept there. And having
washed his face and came out and controlled himself. \[45:1\] And Joseph
could not refrain him with everyone standing near him, but he said,
’Send everyone away from me.’ And no one stood near Joseph, when he
made himself known to his brethren. And he cried aloud with weeping. All
the Egyptians heard, and it became known Pharao’s house. But Joseph said
to his brothers, ’I am Joseph. Is my father still alive? And his
brothers could not answer him, for they were deeply troubled. But Joseph
said to his brothers, ’Come near me’; and they came near. And he said,
’I am your brother Joseph, whom you sold into Egypt. Now then do not
be grieved, and do not let it seem hard to you that you sold me here,
for God sent me before you for life. For this is the second year there
is famine in the land, and there are still five years left, in which
there will be neither ploughing, nor harvest. For God sent me before you
that a remnant might be left for you on earth to nourish a great remnant
of you. Now then it was not you that sent me here, but God; and he has
made me like a father to Pharao, and lord of all his house, and ruler of
all the land of Egypt. Hurry, therefore, and go up to my father, and say
to him, ’This is what your son Joseph says: God has made me lord of all
the land of Egypt; come down therefore to me, and do not delay. And you
shall dwell in the land of Gesem of Arabia; and you shall be near me,
you and your sons, and your sons’ sons, your sheep and your oxen, and
whatever is yours; and I will nourish you there—for there are still five
years of famine—lest you and your sons, and all your possessions be
wiped out. Look, your own eyes can see, and the eyes of my brother
Benjamin can see, that it is my mouth that speaks to you. Report,
therefore, to my father all my glory in Egypt, and everything you have
seen, and make haste and bring down my father here. And he fell on his
brother Benjamin’s neck, and wept on him; and Benjamin wept on his neck.
And he kissed all his brothers, and wept on them; and after this his
brothers spoke to him. And the report was carried into Pharao’s house,
saying, ’Joseph ’s brothers have come.’ And Pharao rejoiced, and his
household.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 115.

I will pay my vows to the Lord in the presence of all his people.

Verse: I believed, therefore I spoke. I was greatly humbled.

The Reading is from Proverbs.  
\[21:23-31 and 22:1-4\]

One that guards their mouth and tongue keeps their soul from affliction.
An arrogant, self-willed and boastful person ** is called a plague;
while one that remembers ills is a transgressor.[\[6\]](#_ftn6) Desires
kill the sluggard; for his hands do not choose to do anything. An
ungodly person longs for evil desires all day; but the just is
ungrudgingly merciful and compassionate. The sacrifices of the ungodly
are abomination to the Lord, for they offer them lawlessly. A false
witness will perish; but an obedient man will speak cautiously. An
ungodly man brazenly gives undertakings in person;[\[7\]](#_ftn7) but
the upright himself understands his ways. There is no wisdom, there is
no courage, there is no counsel against the ungodly. A horse is prepared
for the day of war; but help is from the Lord. \[22:1-4\] A good name is
better than great wealth, while good favour is above silver and gold. A
rich and a poor person met together; but the Lord made them both. An
intelligent man seeing a bad man severely chastised is himself
disciplined[\[8\]](#_ftn8), but fools pass by and are punished. The
offspring of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and wealth, and glory, and
life.

**THURSDAY BEFORE PALM SUNDAY**

## AT THE TRITHEKTI

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 1.

Do not forget the voice of your servants, Lord. Remember that we have
always put our hope in you, the one who can all things, and help us, we
implore.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 117.[\[9\]](#_ftn9)

This is the gate of the Lord, the just with enter by it.

Verse:* *Give thanks to the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[65:8-16\]

Thus says the Lord, As when a grape in found in the cluster, people will
say, Do not destroy it; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for the
sake of the one that serves me, for that person’s sake I will not
destroy them ** all. And I will lead out the posterity of Jacob and that
of Juda, and they shall inherit my holy mountain: and my chosen ones
shall inherit it and my servants shall dwell there. And there shall be
in the forest folds of flocks, and the valley of Achor will ** be a
resting for herds for my people, who have sought me. But you that have
deserted me, and forget my holy mountain, and prepare a table for the
devil, and fill up a drink-offering to Fortune, I will hand you over to
the sword, you shall all fall by slaughter: for I called you, and you
did not obey; I spoke, and you disobeyed; and you did evil in my sight,
and chose the things I did not want. Therefore thus says the Lord, See,
those who serve me shall eat, while you shall go hungry. See, those who
serve me shall drink, while you shall go thirsty. See, those who serve
me shall rejoice, while you shall be ashamed. See, those who serve me
shall exult with joy, while you shall cry because of the pain of your
heart, and howl from the affliction of your spirit. For you shall leave
behind your name for the satisfaction[\[10\]](#_ftn10) of my chosen
ones, but the Lord shall destroy you, while those who serve me shall be
called by a new name, which shall be blessed on the earth; for they
shall bless the true God.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 118.

I ran in the way of your commandments, when you set my heart at large.

Verse: Lay down for me, O Lord, the way of your statutes, and I shall
always seek it.

**AT VESPERS**

Prokeimenon. Tone 6. Psalm 119.

When I was afflicted I called to the Lord, and he heard me.

Verse:* *O Lord, deliver my soul from unjust lips and from a deceitful
tongue.

The Reading is from  Genesis.  
\[46:1-7\]

Israel departed, he and all that he had, and came to the well of the
oath; and he offered a sacrifice to the God of his father Isaac. God
spoke to Israel in a night vision, saying, Jacob, Jacob; and he said,
What is it? And he says to him, I am the God of your fathers; do not be
afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation
there. And I will go down with you into Egypt, and I will bring you up
in the end; and Joseph will place his hands on your eyes. And Jacob rose
up from the well of the oath; and the sons of Israel took up their
father, and the baggage, and their wives on the wagons, which
Joseph[\[11\]](#_ftn11) had sent to take him. And taking up their goods,
and all the property, which they had acquired in the land of Chanaan,
they came into the land of Egypt, Jacob, and all his seed with him, his
sons, and the sons of his sons with him; his ** daughters, and the
daughters of his daughters; and he brought all his seed into Egypt.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 120.

The Lord will guard you from every evil, the Lord will guard your soul.

Verse:* *I have lifted up my eyes to the mountains. From where will my
help come?

The Reading is from Proverbs.  
\[23:15-35 and 24:1-5\]

My son, if your heart is wise, you will gladden my heart also; and your
lips, if they are right, will continue speaking with my lips. Do not let
not your heart envy sinners: but be in fear of the Lord all the day. For
if you keep these things, you will have posterity; and your hope will
depart. Listen, my ** son, and be wise, and rightly direct the thoughts
of your heart. Do not be a drinker, nor stretch yourself in
subscriptions to parties, and purchases of meats,[\[12\]](#_ftn12) for
every drunkard and lecher will become poor; and every idler will dress
in rags and tatters. Listen, my ** son, to your father who begot you,
and do not despise your mother ** because she has grown old. Buy truth,
and do not sell wisdom, instruction, and
understanding.[\[13\]](#_ftn13)  A righteous father brings up well; and
his soul rejoices over a wise son. Let your father and your mother
rejoice over you, and let her that bore you be glad. My ** son, give me
your heart, and let your eyes observe my ways. For a foreign house is a
perforated wine-jar; and something foreign is a narrow
well.[\[14\]](#_ftn14) For such a one will perish suddenly; and every
transgressor will be destroyed.[\[15\]](#_ftn15) Who has ** woe? Who has
turmoil? who has disputes? and who unpleasantness and gossip? who has **
needless bruises? whose eyes are livid? Do they not belong to those who
spend long hours at wine? to ** those who search out where drinking
parties are? Do not get drunk with wine; but talk with just men, and
converse in discussions.[\[16\]](#_ftn16) For if you fix your eyes on
bowls and cups, you will afterwards walk around more naked than a
pestle. Finally such a person ** lies prostrate like someone bitten by a
snake, and poison is spread through him as by a horned serpent. Whenever
your eyes see a strange woman, then your mouth will speak dishonest
things. And you will lie like someone on the high seas, or a steersman
in a great storm. And you will say, They hit me, and I was not hurt;
they made fun of me, and I did not realise it. When will it be morning,
so that I may go and look for companions to go with? \[24:1\] My son, do
not envy bad men, nor long to be with them. For their heart meditates
lies, and their lips speak mischief. A house is built by wisdom, and is
erected by understanding. Its rooms are filled by discernment with all
precious and excellent wealth. A wise man is better than a strong man;
and a man who has prudence than a large estate.

**FRIDAY BEFORE PALM SUNDAY**

AT THE TRITHEKTI

Troparion of the Prophecy. Tone 3.

Irresistible, Lord, is the anger of your threat on sinners; and we are
unworthy to fix our gaze and ask you for mercy. Do not destroy in your
rage and anger us who you fashioned with your own hand.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 121.

I rejoiced at those who said to me, ‘We shall go to the house of the
Lord’.

Verse:* *For the sake of the house of the Lord our God, I have sought
good things for you.

The Reading is from the Prophecy of Isaias.  
\[66:10-24\]

Exult, Jerusalem, and all you that love her keep a festival in her. 
Rejoice greatly with her, all who now ** grieve over her, that you may
suck, and be satisfied with the breast of her consolation; that you may
milk out, and delight yourselves from the entrance of her glory. For
thus says the Lord, See, I turn towards them like a river of peace, and
like an overflowing torrent flooding them with the glory of the nations.
Their children will be carried on the shoulders, and comforted on the
knees. As a mother comforts her child, so will I too will comfort you;
and you shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And you will see, and your
heart will rejoice, and your bones will spring up like grass; and the
hand of the Lord will be known to those who fear him, and he will
threaten the disobedient. For, see, the Lord will come like fire, and
his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his vengeance with wrath, and
his execration with a flame of fire. For with the fire of the Lord all
the earth will be judged, and all flesh with his sword. Many will be
slain by the Lord. Those who sanctify and purify themselves for the
gardens and the porches, and eat swine’s flesh, and abominations, and
mice, will perish together, says the Lord. And I know ** their works and
their thoughts. I am going to assemble all the nations and tongues; and
they will come, and they will see my glory. And I will leave signs on
them, and I will send out those of them that have been saved to the
nations, to Tharsis, and Phoud, and Loud, and Mosoch, and to Thobel, and
to Greece, and to the isles far away, to those who have not heard my
name, nor seen my glory. And they will declare my glory among the
nations, and bring your brethren out of all the nations as a gift for
the Lord with horses, and chariots, in covered chariots with ** mules
and canopies, to the holy city Jerusalem, said the Lord, just as the
children of Israel bring their sacrifices to me with psalms into the
house of the Lord. And I will take from them priests and Levites for
myself, says the Lord. For as the new heaven and the new earth, which I
am making, remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your
name last. And from New Moon to New Moon, and from Sabbath to Sabbath,
all flesh will come to worship before me in Jerusalem, said the Lord.
And they will go out, and see the corpses of the men who have
transgressed against me: for their worm will not die, and their fire
will not be quenched; and they will be a spectacle to all flesh.

Prokeimenon. Tone 6. Psalm 122.

Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy on us.

Verse: I ** have lifted my eyes to you who dwell in heaven.

**AT VESPERS**

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 123.

Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

Verse: If the Lord had not been among us, let Israel now say; if the
Lord had not been among us when people rose up against us, they would
have swallowed us down alive.

The Reading is from Genesis.  
\[49:33 and 50:1-26\]

When Jacob had finished giving instructions to his sons, he drew his
feet up into the bed, breathed his last, and was gathered to his people.
\[50:1\] And Joseph fell upon his father’s face, and wept over him, and
kissed him. And Joseph commanded his servants the
embalmers[\[17\]](#_ftn17) to embalm his father; and the embalmers
embalmed Israel. And they completed forty days for him, for this is the
number of days for burial; and Egypt mourned him for seventy days. And
when the days of mourning were over, Joseph spoke to Pharao’s princes,
saying, If I have found favour in your sight, speak concerning me in
Pharao’s ears, saying, My father made me swear an oath, saying, In the
sepulchre which I dug for myself in the land of Chanaan, there you are
to bury me. Now therefore I will go up and bury my father, and come back
again. And Pharao said to Joseph, Go up, bury your father, as he made
you swear. So Joseph went up to bury his father; and all Pharao’s
servants went up with him, and the elders of his house, and all the
elders of the land of Egypt, and Joseph’s whole household, and his
brothers, and all his father’s house. But they left behind his
family[\[18\]](#_ftn18) and the sheep and the oxen in the land of Gesem.
And there went up with him also chariots and horsemen; and it was a very
great company. And they came to the threshing-floor of Atad, which is
beyond Jordan; and they lamented him with great and intense lamentation;
and he made a mourning for his father for seven days. And the
inhabitants of the land of Chanaan saw the mourning at the floor of
Atad, and said, ’This is a great mourning for the Egyptians’; therefore
they[\[19\]](#_ftn19) called the name of the place, which is beyond
Jordan, The Mourning of Egypt. And this is what his sons did for him.
And his sons carried him up into the land of Chanaan, and buried him in
the double cave, the cave Abraham had bought for possession of a burial
place, from Ephrom the Chettite, facing Mambre. And Joseph returned to
Egypt, he and his brothers, and those who had gone up with him to bury
his father. But when Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead,
they said, ’Perhaps Joseph will bear malice against us, and pay us back
all the evils which we did against him. And they came to Joseph, and
said, Your father made us swear an oath ** before his death, saying,
’Speak to Joseph as follows, Forgive them their injustice and their
sin, for they have done evil against you; and now forgive the injustice
of the servants of the God of your father’. And Joseph wept as they
spoke to him. And they came to him and said, We here are your servants.
And Joseph said to them, ’Do not be afraid, for I am God’s. You took
counsel against me for evil, but God took counsel for me for good, so
that things ** might be as they are ** today, and many people might be
fed’. And he said to them, ’Do not be afraid, I will support you, and
your families’. And he encouraged them, and spoke kindly to them. And
Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he and his brothers, and all his father’s family.
And Joseph lived a hundred and ten years. And Joseph saw Ephraim’s
children to the third generation; and the sons of Machir, Manasse’s son
were born on Joseph’s thighs. And Joseph spoke to his bothers, saying,
’I am dying, but God will surely visit you, and will bring you out of
this land into the land which God swore to your[\[20\]](#_ftn20)
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob’. And Joseph made the sons of Israel,
swear an oath, saying, ’At the visitation with which God will visit you,
then you shall carry up my bones from here with you’. And Joseph died,
aged a hundred and ten; and they prepared his corpse, and put him in a
coffin in Egypt.

Prokeimenon. Tone 4. Psalm 124.

Those who trust in the Lord are like Mount Sion.

Verse:* *One who dwells in Jerusalem will never be shaken.

The Reading is from Proverbs.  
\[31:8-31\]

Open your mouth with the word of God, and judge all things
fairly[\[21\]](#_ftn21). Open your mouth and judge justly, and defend
the poor and weak. Who can find a dynamic wife? Such a wife is more
valuable than precious stones. The heart of her husband has confidence
in her: such a wife will not be in need of fine spoils. For she achieves
good for her husband all her life long. Winding off wool and flax, she
makes[\[22\]](#_ftn22) it serviceable with her hands. She is like a ship
trading from a afar: and she gathers her wealth. And she rises by night,
and gives food to her household, and tasks to her maidservants. She
views a farm, and buys it: and with the fruit of her hands she plants a
plot of land. She strongly girds her loins, and sets her arms to work.
She knows by experience that working is good; and her lamp is not
extinguished all night. She reaches out her arms to what is needful, and
applies her hands to the spindle. She opens her hands to the poor, and
hands out fruit to the needy. Her husband is not anxious about those at
home when he delays somewhere: for all those round her are clothed. She
makes outer garments of double thickness for her husband, and garments
of fine linen and scarlet for herself. Her husband becomes a an object
of admiration ** in the gates, when he sits in council with the senior
inhabitants of the land. She makes fine linens and sells them to the
Phoenicians, and girdles to the Canaanites. She puts on strength and
glory; and rejoices in the last days. She opens her mouth with care and
with propriety, and keeps control over her tongue. The ways of her
household are careful[\[23\]](#_ftn23), and she does not eat the bread
of idleness. She opens her mouth wisely, and in accordance with law. And
her ** generosity establishes her children, and they grow rich, and her
husband praises her. Many daughters have obtained power, many have
gained wealth; but you have exceeded, and surpassed them all. Charms are
false, and a woman’s beauty is worthless: for it is a woman of
understanding that is blessed, and let her praise the fear the Lord.
Give her of the fruit of her lips; and let her husband be praised in the
gates.

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) The Hebrew has the more subtle, ’of my son’s game’.
Some modern English versions, such as NAB and NIV, have adopted
the<span style="font-variant:small-caps;"> lxx </span>version.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) This clause is not in the Hebrew and its meaning is
not clear. The verb is very rare in classical Greek and means ’to
pierce, stab or gouge’. But is more frequent in the passive and used
metaphorically, ’to be stunned, bewildered’, and even ’to be silenced’.
In patristic Greek, of course, it takes on the meaning ’to be moved to
repentance’; and the cognate noun, *katanyxis*, means ’compunction ’. 
The meaning here, then, could be either ’stunned ’, or ’deeply moved’,
or ’reduced to silence’. The NAB and the *Jerusalem Bible*, in both
French and English, follow the Septuagint and give the verb the latter
meaning. The Vulgate, followed by the Douai version, has ’moved ’.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) The Greek preposition *apo* presents a problem, as
does the Hebrew. It could mean either ’from, of ’, or ’away from, far
from’. In the context the latter seems more likely and this is how most
translators understand it.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) The Hebrew word here translated in Greek as *giants*
is the same as that in Psalm 87, where the Greek, by a deliberate
misreading of the Hebrew, has *doctors*. The reference is to the dead,
the *shades*. 

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) This sentence is not in the Hebrew. Another possible
translation is *Blessed be that man by God.*

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) The last clauses are not in the Hebrew.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) The Greek of this clause is not easy, and the
translation given is only a suggestion. The Hebrew means something like,
*the ungodly puts on a bold face*.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) The Greek word means both *is taught* and *is
disciplined*. This is difficult to reproduce in English.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Psalm 116 is omitted, presumably because it is only
two verses long.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) This is meaning of the Greek, which has misread the
Hebrew, which means *abomination.*

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) The Hebrew has ’Pharaoh’, not ’Joseph’.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) The Hebrew is quite different. The Greek translator
appears to have underlined the financial aspect of the dangers of eating
and drinking with others. Polonius would have agreed.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) This verse, 23, is not in the original Septuagint,
but it is found in the Triodion. The Greek is a possible translation of
the Hebrew, but most versions translate the latter with something like:
’Buy truth, and do not sell \<*it; buy*\> wisdom, instruction, and
understanding’ \[NRSV\]. The bracketed words in italics are not in the
Hebrew, and the Greek is a literal version of the Hebrew. Some scholars
consider the verse to be a secondary addition to the Hebrew.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) The Greek here is very odd. The Hebrew refers to
the dangers of prostitutes for a young man. ’Foreignness’ is linked in
the Old Testament to idolatry, which is often seen as adultery and
’foreign’ women as a danger since the time of Solomon. 

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) This verse bears virtually no relation to the
Hebrew, which continues the theme of the dangers of the prostitute.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) The Greek word *peripatos* means a place for
walking, particularly a covered walk, but also a ’discussion’ such as
one might take part while walking in such a place. It also refers to the
well known school of philosophy. The Hebrew again is quite different. 

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Strictly ’one who prepares for burial’ with the
cognate verb ’to prepare for burial’. This is the earliest occurrence of
these two words in Greek, and the only ones in the
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span>. The common word for
’bury ’ is *thapto*, and so it seems probable that these unusual words
are used here to mean ’embalm ’. The Hebrew speaks of ’doctors ’. 

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) The Hebrew has ’children’. Does the
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span> mean to include the
women in those left behind?

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) The editions of the Triodion differ here between
singular and plural, as do the manuscripts and ancient versions. Wevers
and Rahlfs both print a singular, but the plural is more natural and it
is the reading of the Triodion published by the *Apostoliki Diakonia*,
which is generally more reliable than other Greek editions.

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) This is the reading of the Triodion and many
manuscripts, though the critical editions of Wevers and Rahlfs favour
the first person. The phrase is not found in the Hebrew.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) In Hebrew this verse is very different and its
second half contains a well known problem of translation. 

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) The majority of verbs in what follows are aorist,
but this is simply because the Hebrew employs the ’perfect’.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) Literally ’watertight’.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

