\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](dec-int.md) \]
\[ [6 December](6_december.md) \]
\[ [Pre-Christmas](pre-christmas.md) \] \[ Sunday of the Ancestors \]
\[ [Forefeast of the Nativity](forefeas.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Before the Nativity](sunbefnat.md) \]
\[ [24 December](24dec.md) \] \[ [25 December](25dec.md) \]

DECEMBER 11TH

## SUNDAY OF THE HOLY FOREFATHERS

AT VESPERS

**After the Opening Psalm we recite the whole of the 1st Kathisma of the
Psalter.**

At ‘Lord, I have cried’, we insert 10 stichera, and sing 3 of the
Resurrection, 3 by Anatolios and 4 Prosomia of the Forefathers.

Tone 8. 

Today, as we celebrate the memorial of the Forefathers, let us the
faithful raise a hymn to Christ the Redeemer, the Lord who magnifies
them among all the nations, and faithfully performs extraordinary
wonders, as he is mighty and powerful; and he showed forth from them a
rod of power for us, pure Mary the Child of God who alone knew no man,
from whom the flower, Christ, came forth, blossoming life for all and
pleasure without cost and eternal life.

Master, who delivered the Holy Youths from the fire, and Daniel from the
lions’ mouths; who blessed Abraham and Isaac your servant and his son
Jacob; who were well pleased to be born from their seed for us, that you
might save the Forefathers who had fallen away of old, to be crucified
and buried, and you smash all the bonds of death, and you raise all who
from every age were among the dead, who worship, O Christ, your eternal
Kingdom.

By the dew of the Spirit God’s Youths rejoicing as in rain walked
mystically in the midst of the flame, typifying in advance the Trinity
and Christ’s incarnation; and as wise through faith they quenched the
power of fire. And the just Daniel appeared as a tamer of lions.
Besought by their intercessions, O Saviour who loves mankind, deliver us
also from the unquenchable and eternal fire, and make us worthy to gain
your heavenly Kingdom.

The faithful, Holy Youths in the furnace of fire, as in dew, mystically
prefigured your coming from the Virgin, which shone forth without
burning for us. And the just Daniel, wonderful among Prophets, clearly
foreshowed your second divine coming when he cried: I see where thrones
are set, and the judge has taken his throne, and a river of fire is
present; from which at their intercessions may we be delivered, O Master
Christ.

Glory. Tone 6. By Anatolios.

Let us the faithful today praise all the Fathers before the law:
Abraham, God’s friend, Isaac, born by promise, Jacob and the twelve
Patriarchs; honouring with them meek David and Daniel the Prophet of
desires, and the three Children who changed the furnace into dew, asking
forgiveness of Christ God, who is glorified in his Saints.

Both now. Theotokion. The 1st of the Tone of the Week.

At the Aposticha the Resurrection stichera of the Tone.

Glory. Tone 3. By Germanos.

Come, lovers of festival, let us praise in song the gathering of the
Forefathers: Adam the Forefather, Enoch. Noah, Melchisedek, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob; after the law Moses and Aaron, Jesus, Samuel and David;
with them Isaias, Jeremias, Ezekiel and Daniel, and the Twelve with
Elias, Elisaius and them all; Zachary and the Baptist and all who
proclaimed Christ, the life and resurrection of our race.

Both now. Theotokion. The same Tone.

By the Father’s will without seed you conceived of the Holy Spirit the
Son of God, who is from the Father without mother before the ages, but
for us he came of you without father; you bore him in the flesh and
suckled him as a babe; therefore do not cease to intercede that our
souls may be delivered from dangers.

Apolytikion of the Resurrection.

Glory. Both now. Of the Forefathers. Tone 2.

You justified the Forefathers by faith, through them betrothing in
advance the Church from the nations. The Saints will exult in glory, for
from their seed there is a glorious fruit, she who bore you without
seed. At their intercessions, Christ God, save our souls.

And Dismissal.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

