\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](theodore.md) \] \[ [To the Nun Anna](Anna-ep.md) \] \[ [Two Letters from Exile](exile-epp.md) \] \[ Catechesis 2 \] \[ [Catechesis 4](ths04.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 6](ths06.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 7](ths07.md) \] \[ [Large Catechesis 14](ths14l.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 20](ths20.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 24](ths24.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 32](ths32.md) \] \[ [Lent](lent.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 78](Ths78.md) \]

**INTRODUCTION**

There is some confusion as to when the post-paschal instructions were given. The Greek text of the *Small Catecheses* by Skrettas, based on Auvray’s edition, gives no indication of dates for numbers 1-6; the list in the introduction to the Migne edition gives this one as *In Dominica Sancti Thomae, sive prima post Pascha*, but the Latin heading of the sermon itself has simply *Post Pascha*, and for number 5 *In Octavam Paschae*, though the Greek list gives this as for the Wednesday of Mid-Pentecost.

It should be remembered that St Theodore and his monks were in exile in the Propontis at this time. This perhaps explains a number of allusions to shipping and metaphors taken from it in these Instructions. He appears to have some difficulty in keeping the community together. He refers to the problem again in no. 103, where he says he has to keeping mentioning it.

**CATECHESIS 2**

*That we must always die the chosen death, and on good order.*

Brethren and Fathers, Pascha is gone by and the feast has been completed; but rejoicing and feasting, should we wish, have by no means gone by, for we are always allowed to rejoice and feast spiritually, in accordance with the saying of Scripture, *Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I will say: Rejoice!* \[Phil. 4:4.\] But how shall this be? If we always keep fresh the memory of the sufferings of our Saviour Christ; that the Lord of glory was crucified for our sake, that he was buried and that he was raised on the third day, raising us with himself and giving us life with himself, *so that being alive we may no longer live for ourselves, but for him who died and was raised for our sake*, \[2 Cor. 5:15.\] so that we can confidently say with the Apostle, *I live, but no longer I; Christ lives in me*. *What I now live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the Son of God who loved me and who handed himself over for me.*\[ Gal. 2:20.\] This is the sum of the mystery: to be corpses to the world but alive to God.

And so after Pascha we must be watchful and awake, pray and be stirred to compunction, weep and be illumined, always *bearing in our bodies the death of the Lord Jesus*, \[2 Cor. 4:10.\] dying each day by choice, always journeying from the body and dwelling with the Lord through leaving the thoughts of the flesh. Do not say, ‘It is not Lent now ‘. It is always Lent for the watchful. Do not say, ‘I have spent hours in ascetic activity and it is necessary to rest’. There is no rest here. Do not say, ‘I have grown old in virtue and I am not afraid’. There is always fear of reversal; and Satan in one instant has cast into the deep of sin many who had grown old in virtue. *So let the one who thinks they stand beware lest they fall*, \[1 Cor. 10:12.\] and the one who thinks they have been guarded see to it that they are not off their guard. So let there be guard and attention and moderation with regard to sleep, to food, to drink and to whatever else, so that the body may be kept under control and brought into servitude, \[Cf. 1 Cor. 9:27.\] lest, like a colt in fine condition which takes the bit between its teeth \[St Theodore is thinking of the myth of the Charioteer in the Phaedrus, where this precise phrase occurs \[254D\], it push us down the precipice of sin.

I ordered you in a previous instruction not to go off on your own and live by yourselves in more inaccessible places \[St Theodore refers to this problem again in number 103, where he says he has to keep referring to it.\]. Yet again some of you are doing just that. What do you want? *That I should come to you with a rod, or with love and a spirit of gentleness?*\[ 1 Cor. 4:21.\] In short, I spoke and I was not listened to; in short, you clearly saw your brother disciplined for this very thing and you were not restrained. Take care that none of you falls into a similar sort of disobedience. These instructions are not given to no purpose or vainly. *Because God is not a God of disorder but of peace, as in all the churches of the Saints.*\[ 1 Cor. 14:33.\] And so *let everything be done fittingly and in order*, \[1 Cor. 14:40.\] so that in all things the Lord may be glorified in you. Those of you, brethren, who come alongside \[The metaphor is of a ship coming to harbour.\] here and there take care for yourselves where and how you settle and dwell. Do not be like dissolute people, but like ones bound by the spirit; not like ones without supervision, but like ones under the supervision of the Lord, who oversees your every movement and action; not ones being driven randomly here and there, but remaining in stillness in your cells, attending to your manual work, your prayers and psalmody; not amassing treasure for yourselves from love of money, but content with what you have now. For he himself said, *I will not abandon you*, *I will not desert you, so that we may say confidently, The Lord is my helper, and I shall not fear what man will do to me. Remember your brethren, and keeping before you the outcome of their lives imitate their faith.* \[Hebrews 13:5-7. St Theodore has freely adapted verse 7, which in the original refers to ‘leaders’ rather than ‘brothers’.\]

Such was the blessed Dometianos, whom we have praised and whose memorial is with the Saints. How great the business he achieved, how great the life he accomplished by few toils and struggles, inheriting eternal glory, a man of no worth in human terms, but since he chose virtue and loved God, God exalted him, in accordance with what is written, *Because I will glorify those who glorify me, and the one who despises me will be dishonoured* \[1 Kingd. 2:30.\]. It is right to rejoice and be glad in such brothers; but it is of no use unless we also make our own contribution. If we contribute as best we can, we too will have a portion with the Saints in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be the glory and the might with the Father and the holy Spirit now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.   

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
