\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 103](catechesis_103.md) \] \[ Catechesis 40 \]
\[ [Catechesis 49](catechesis_49.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 60-64](ths60-64.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 66 & 67](ths66-67.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

CATECHESIS 40
=============

That we should conduct ourselves in newness of life,\
just as we promised through the holy
Schema.[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-style: normal"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}[]{style="font-style:normal"}

Brethren and Fathers, just as the hungry long to eat and the thirsty to
drink, so we should be enthusiastic to listen to the word of God. For by
listening we gain the greatest benefits. If we are slothful, we put away
sloth; if we are eager, we become even more eager; and from both the
outcome is good. What then is the present word? *[For, ]{lang="EN-US"
style="mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:HE"}*[[ ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes"}says
Scripture, *this is how God loved the world: he gave his only Son, so
that everyone who believes in him may not perish but have eternal
life*[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2}*.* Nor did
he simply give him, but *even to death, death on a
cross*[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3}]{lang="EN-US"
style="mso-ansi-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:HE"}. How? We were
enslaved to the devil through Adam’s transgression, we were under the
reign of death, sold under sin[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}, guilty and
captive, subject to corruption. Therefore the only Son of God came,
giving himself as a ransom for all. He not only delivered us from
death’s possession, but also, having washed *us from our sins by his own
blood, he made us a kingdom (of heaven) and priests to his God and
Father.*[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5} Have you
seen the mighty love of his strength? Have you seen the measureless
mercy of his love for humanity? How unsearchable are his mercies and
inscrutable his acts of compassion[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6}, which *he
has poured out on us through Jesus Christ our
Saviour!*[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7} What may we,
poor wretches, say to all this? What may we think? Shall we willingly
return to sin? Shall we long for dishonour? Shall we choose corruption
and condemnation? *By no means,* says the Apostle, *we have died to sin,
how shall we continue to live in it? Or are you ignorant that as many of
us as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his death. We were
buried then with him through baptism to death, so that, just as Christ
was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too might
walk in newness of life*.[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8} So,
brothers, let us walk in newness of life, just as we promised when we
took the habit. Let us conduct ourselves with righteousness and
holiness, *as befits saints*[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9} with peace and harmony, with reverence
and piety, with holiness and dispassion, not being led away *in
ignorance by our former[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10}* deceits,
but fleeing our former notions like fire and standing fast on the rock
of our faith. This is *newness*. And what is ‘oldness’? Indulgence, by
which Adam our forefather was caught and became an outcast from Paradise
and underwent a life of much grief. Envy, by which Cain was inflamed and
murdered his brother Abel because his gifts were preferred, and as a
result he passed his whole life in fear and groaning. From these two
sins ten thousand evils surfaced in the world. Because of these the
Flood utterly wiped out all the high ground of the earth. Because of
these Sodom and Gomorra were reduced to ashes by fire and brimstone as a
warning to the impious. Do you see what sin has brought about *and the
desire of the eyes and pride in one’s way of
life*.[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11} But
nevertheless, as has been said before, we have been called by God’s
mercy, we have gained freedom, we have run to be adopted as sons. Let us
then stand with the freedom with which Christ has freed us, and let us
be guarded by the glory with which Christ has glorified us, spitting on
everything that belongs to empty vanity, reckoning them all secondary
for the sake Christ: dishonour as honour, affliction as joy, blows as
pleasures, persecution as happiness, death as life, just as our holy
fathers and brothers, *[ ]{style="mso-spacerun:
yes"}whose names are in the book of
life*,[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn12){#_ftnref12} whom we
have remembered today, chose to do. For if we too live like this, we
shall appear here *like beacons in the world, holding on to the word of
life*,[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn13){#_ftnref13} while in
the age to come we shall inherit the kingdom of heaven in Christ Jesus
our Lord, to whom be glory and might with the Father and the Holy
Spirit, now and ever , and to the ages of ages.

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

\

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1} The manuscripts give no particular date
for this Instruction, but its place, between Theophany and Lent, and the
reference in the last paragraph to ‘our holy fathers and brothers, who
have been commemorated by us today’ strongly suggest that it was given
on the Saturday before Cheese Sunday. The references to Adam and his
banishment from Paradise, the theme of the next day’s services, support
this.

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2} John 3:16

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3} Phil. 2:8.

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4} Cf. Romans 7:14, which is alluded to in
the Anaphora of St Basil in a similar context in the first person
plural. It may be that St Theodore has the Anaphora in mind here, rather
than Romans.

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5} Apocalypse 1:5-6. St Theodore is probably
quoting from memory The word ‘heaven’ is not in the text of the
Apocalypse. The standard Byzantine text has ‘kings’, rather than
‘kingdom’, which is the accepted reading in modern critical editions. It
is also that underlying the Vulgate’s ‘regnum’. The Latin in Migne does
not include the word.

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6} Cf. Romans 11:33.

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7} Titus 3:6.

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8} Romans 6:2-4.

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9} Ephesians 5:3.

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10} 1 Peter 1:14. St Theodore replaces
‘desires’ by ‘deceits’.

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11} 1 John 2:16. The Greek *bios* is not
easy to translate here. Some translators go so far as to put ‘riches’.
Perhaps ‘style of life’, ‘standard of living’.

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref12){#_ftn12} Philippians 4;3.

</div>

<div id="ftn13" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[13\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference style="mso-special-character:
footnote"}](#_ftnref13){#_ftn13} Philippians 2:15-16.

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
