\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 103](catechesis_103.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 40](ths40.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 49](catechesis_49.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 60-64](ths60-64.md) \] \[ Catecheses 66 & 67 \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

## INTRODUCT

## ORY NOTE

The place of these two catecheses in the numbering suggests that they
may have been given during the 4th week of Lent.

-----

# Catechesis 66

*That this Pascha is a type of the future and eternal Pascha;  
and about endurance and courage.*

Brethren and fathers, Lent is already galloping past and the soul
rejoices at the imminence of Pascha, because by it it finds rest and is
relieved of many toils. Why did this thought sound for me in advance?
Because it is as if our whole life directs its reason contemplating the
eternal Pascha. For this present Pascha, even though it is great and
revered, is nevertheless, as our fathers explain, only a type of that
Pascha to come. For this Pascha is for one day and it passes, while that
Pascha has no successor. From it *pain, grief and sighing have fled
away*[\[1\]](#_ftn1); there everlasting joy, gladness and rejoicing;
there the sound of those who feast[\[2\]](#_ftn2), a choir of those who
keep festival and contemplation of eternal light; where there is the
blessed breakfast[\[3\]](#_ftn3) of Christ and the new[\[4\]](#_ftn4)
drink of which Christ spoke, *I shall not drink of the fruit of this
vine, until I drink it with you new in the kingdom of my
Father.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)* Of this he spoke to his disciples when he was
about to ascend to heaven, *I am going to prepare a place for you and,
if I go, I will prepare a place for you. I am coming again and I will
take you to myself, so that where I am you maybe also. And where I am
going you know, and the way you know.[\[6\]](#_ftn6)*And a little
further on, *On that day you will know that I am in the Father, and you
are in me, and I am in you.[\[7\]](#_ftn7)* And elsewhere, *Father, I
wish that where I am they may be with me also, so that they may see my
glory, which you gave me, because you loved from before the foundation
of the world.[\[8\]](#_ftn8)* But because this concerns not only the
Apostles, but also ourselves, he also said, *I do not ask this only for
them, but also for those who through their word believe in me, so that
all may be one, as you, Father, are in me and I am in you, that they may
also be one in us.[\[9\]](#_ftn9)* What could be more comforting than
these words? What could be more appealing? What soul can they not
soften? What heart not prick with compunction, even should someone say
that the human heart is a nature of stone? With thoughts like these the
saints bore all that they bore, considering afflictions as joys,
constraints as freedoms[\[10\]](#_ftn10), struggles as delights, harsh
training as relaxation, deaths as lives. I beseech you, my brother,
should not we also, since we have the same aim and seek the same Pascha,
bravely and courageously bear our present condition, not falling, not
succumbing to despondency, but rather roused with greater fervour
watching for the wicked serpent who works to deceive us by the passions,
transforming himself into an angel of light,[\[11\]](#_ftn11)and
altering things from what they are; show dark as light, bitter as sweet.
This was how he ensnared our forefather, bewitching his sight and
depicting as beautiful what was not, and as a result through food
casting him out of Paradise. But let us, who have learned by experience
what a deceiver he is, not leave the paradise of God’s commandments,
nor, when he indicates to us that the fruit is beautiful, let the eye of
soul or body be directed there, otherwise we are being caught in the
snare. But let us flee by every means from looking. What the is the
fruit which seems beautiful? The love of the flesh, the evil lust of
every one of the destructive passions. If we avoid experiencing them, my
brothers, we shall be saved and easter[\[12\]](#_ftn12) to age on age,
with all the Saints in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and might
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages
of ages. Amen.

 

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Isaias 35:10. The phrase is familiar from the prayer
for the departed.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Cf. Psa. 42:4, where the Greek has a singular. The
same phrase is found, but with the plural, in the prayers after
Communion.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Cf. John 21:12.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) The Greek has *koinon*, ‘common’, but the word should
be *kainon*, ‘new’, as the following citation makes clear. There is also
an echo of the Paschal canon, ‘Come, let drink a new drink’ (*poma
kainon).*

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Matthew 26:29.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) John 14:2-4.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) John 14:20.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) John 17:24.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) John 17:20-21.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) It is difficult to reproduce the play in Greek on
*stenochoria* and *evrychoria.*

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) 2 Corinthians 11:14.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) St Theodore uses a very rare verb *paschazein*, and
temptation to follow G. M. Hopkins and use ‘easter’ as a verb is
irresistible. The only reference in Lampe is to St Theodore’s
contemporary Theophanes, who uses it of the Quartodecimans, who ‘easter’
with the Jews.

-----

# CATECHESIS 67

*That to feast each day and to easter to the Lord God consists in the
death the passions and the resurrection of the virtues.*

Brethren and fathers, the day of Pascha is drawing near, since with
God’s help we have passed the mid-point of the fast. But are we
pressing forward to reach the Pascha that comes and goes? Have we not
achieved this year after year? The present Pascha too will pass, for
there is nothing lasting inthe present age, but, *All our days pass like
a shadow*,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) and our life travels like a rapid rider, until
it has driven us to the final boundary of life. ‘What’, someone says,
‘is Pascha not to be desired?’ Of course, it very much to be desired.
How could it not be? But we accomplish Pascha every day. And what is
this? Cleansing from sins, contrition of heart, tears of compunction, a
clean conscience, the death *of the parts of us that are earthly:
immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire*,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) and any
other evil that is at work. One who has been found worthy in all this
does not easter and celebrate a much longed for feast to the Lord just
once a year, but, we may say, does so each day. Someone, on the other
hand, who does not have all the foregoing, but is held fast by the
passions, cannot celebrate. For how can someone celebrate whose god is
their stomach?[\[3\]](#_ftn3) Or who is aflame with fleshly lust? Or
melted by the heat of jealousy? Or  drowned by the love of money? Or
enslaved to vainglory? Or caught up by the other passions. No one could
possibly say that someone with a high fever was at rest, or that someone
shipwrecked was making a good voyage. It simply isn’t possible. It is
impossible for someone who has become dark to be enlightened, or for
someone possessed by sins to celebrate. But for you, brothers, we are
confident of better things, ones that promise salvation. For our way of
life is nothing other than preparation[\[4\]](#_ftn4) for a feast. Look
at the reality: psalmody succeeds psalmody; reading, reading; study,
study; prayer, prayer, like a wheel drawing us and joining us to God.
How truly excellent is this way of life, how supremely excellent\! How
blessed this life and thrice-blessed\! So then, since we have been shown
the sought for Pascha, my honoured brothers, let us make it our aim,
and, as far as we can, celebrate it every day, through the death of the
passions and the resurrection of the virtues, in imitation of the Lord,
*because he too suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should
follow in his steps*.[\[5\]](#_ftn5) And I say this, not so we become
judges of the others —*for each has their own load to
carry*[\[6\]](#_ftn6)—but so that, conscious of the grace that has been
given us by God, we may give thanks to the giver, glorify the
benefactor, repay the master, who has not only granted our present
blessings, but also, to those who genuinely serve him to the end, he
will also give those that are in his promises, that eternal and heavenly
Pascha. May we all attain it, by the grace and love for humankind of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might, with the Father and the
Holy Spirit, now and always, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

 

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Psalm 143:4.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Colossians 3:5.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Cf. Philippians 3:19.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) The ordinary Greek word for ‘preparation’,
*paraskevi*, in Christian Greek also means Friday, in particular Good
Friday, the ‘preparation’ for Pascha.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) 1 Peter 2:21. The critical editions have the second
person throughout.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Galatians 6:5.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

