\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 103](catechesis_103.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 40](ths40.md) \] \[ [Catechesis 49](catechesis_49.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 60-64](ths60-64.md) \] \[ Catecheses 66 & 67 \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

INTRODUCT
---------

ORY NOTE
--------

The place of these two catecheses in the numbering suggests that they
may have been given during the 4th week of Lent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[]{style="text-transform: uppercase; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

Catechesis 66
=============

[]{style="font-size:18.0pt;
mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

*[That this Pascha is a type of the future and eternal Pascha;\
and about endurance and
courage.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}*

[Brethren and fathers, Lent is already galloping past and the soul
rejoices at the imminence of Pascha, because by it it finds rest and is
relieved of many toils. Why did this thought sound for me in advance?
Because it is as if our whole life directs its reason contemplating the
eternal Pascha. For this present Pascha, even though it is great and
revered, is nevertheless, as our fathers explain, only a type of that
Pascha to come. For this Pascha is for one day and it passes, while that
Pascha has no successor. From it *pain, grief and sighing have fled
away*[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}[;
]{style="text-transform:uppercase"}there everlasting joy, gladness and
rejoicing; there the sound of those who
feast[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2}, a choir of
those who keep festival and contemplation of eternal light; where there
is the blessed breakfast[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3} of Christ
and the new[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4} drink of
which Christ spoke, *I shall not drink of the fruit of this vine, until
I drink it with you new in the kingdom of my
Father.[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5}* Of this he
spoke to his disciples when he was about to ascend to heaven, *I am
going to prepare a place for you and, if I go, I will prepare a place
for you. I am coming again and I will take you to myself, so that where
I am you maybe also. And where I am going you know, and the way you
know.[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6}*And a little
further on, *On that day you will know that I am in the Father, and you
are in me, and I am in you.[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn7){#_ftnref7}* And
elsewhere, *Father, I wish that where I am they may be with me also, so
that they may see my glory, which you gave me, because you loved from
before the foundation of the world.[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn8){#_ftnref8}* But because
this concerns not only the Apostles, but also ourselves, he also said,
*I do not ask this only for them, but also for those who through their
word believe in me, so that all may be one, as you, Father, are in me
and I am in you, that they may also be one in
us.[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn9){#_ftnref9}* What could
be more comforting than these words? What could be more appealing? What
soul can they not soften? What heart not prick with compunction, even
should someone say that the human heart is a nature of stone? With
thoughts like these the saints bore all that they bore, considering
afflictions as joys, constraints as
freedoms[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn10){#_ftnref10}, struggles
as delights, harsh training as relaxation, deaths as lives. I beseech
you, my brother, should not we also, since we have the same aim and seek
the same Pascha, bravely and courageously bear our present condition,
not falling, not succumbing to despondency, but rather roused with
greater fervour watching for the wicked serpent who works to deceive us
by the passions, transforming himself into an angel of
light,[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn11){#_ftnref11}and
altering things from what they are; show dark as light, bitter as sweet.
This was how he ensnared our forefather, bewitching his sight and
depicting as beautiful what was not, and as a result through food
casting him out of Paradise. But let us, who have learned by experience
what a deceiver he is, not leave the paradise of GodÂ’s commandments,
nor, when he indicates to us that the fruit is beautiful, let the eye of
soul or body be directed there, otherwise we are being caught in the
snare. But let us flee by every means from looking. What the is the
fruit which seems beautiful? The love of the flesh, the evil lust of
every one of the destructive passions. If we avoid experiencing them, my
brothers, we shall be saved and easter[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character:footnote"}](#_ftn12){#_ftnref12} to age on
age, with all the Saints in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and
might with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages.
Amen.]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt;font-family:"Book Antiqua";
mso-fareast-font-family:"Times New Roman";mso-bidi-font-family:"Times New Roman";
mso-ansi-language:EN-GB;mso-fareast-language:EN-US;mso-bidi-language:AR-SA"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
Isaias 35:10. The phrase is familiar from the prayer for the
departed.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
Cf. Psa. 42:4, where the Greek has a singular. The same phrase is found,
but with the plural, in the prayers after
Communion.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
Cf. John 21:12.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
The Greek has *koinon*, Â‘commonÂ’, but the word should be *kainon*,
Â‘newÂ’, as the following citation makes clear. There is also an echo of
the Paschal canon, Â‘Come, let drink a new drinkÂ’ (*poma
kainon).*]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
Matthew 26:29.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
John 14:2-4.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn7" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[7\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref7){#_ftn7}[
John 14:20.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn8" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[8\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref8){#_ftn8}[
John 17:24.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn9" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[9\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref9){#_ftn9}[
John 17:20-21.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn10" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[10\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref10){#_ftn10}[
It is difficult to reproduce the play in Greek on *stenochoria* and
*evrychoria.*]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn11" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[11\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref11){#_ftn11}[
2 Corinthians
11:14.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn12" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[12\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref12){#_ftn12}[
St Theodore uses a very rare verb *paschazein*, and temptation to follow
G. M. Hopkins and use Â‘easterÂ’ as a verb is irresistible. The only
reference in Lampe is to St TheodoreÂ’s contemporary Theophanes, who
uses it of the Quartodecimans, who Â‘easterÂ’ with the
Jews.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

</div>

</div>

[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

CATECHESIS 67
=============

[]{style="font-size:18.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

*[That to feast each day and to easter to the Lord God consists in the
death the passions and the resurrection of the
virtues.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}*[]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}

[Brethren and fathers, the day of Pascha is drawing near, since with
GodÂ’s help we have passed the mid-point of the fast. But are we
pressing forward to reach the Pascha that comes and goes? Have we not
achieved this year after year? The present Pascha too will pass, for
there is nothing lasting inthe present age, but, *All our days pass like
a shadow*,[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn1){#_ftnref1}
and our life travels like a rapid rider, until it has driven us to the
final boundary of life. Â‘WhatÂ’, someone says, Â‘is Pascha not to be
desired?Â’ Of course, it very much to be desired. How could it not be?
But we accomplish Pascha every day. And what is this? Cleansing from
sins, contrition of heart, tears of compunction, a clean conscience, the
death *of [the parts of us that are earthly: immorality, impurity,
passion, evil
desire]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-language: HE"}*[,[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn2){#_ftnref2}
and any other evil that is at work. One who has been found worthy in all
this does not easter and celebrate a much longed for feast to the Lord
just once a year, but, we may say, does so each day. Someone, on the
other hand, who does not have all the foregoing, but is held fast by the
passions, cannot celebrate. For how can someone celebrate whose god is
their stomach?[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn3){#_ftnref3}
Or who is aflame with fleshly lust? Or melted by the heat of jealousy?
Or[  ]{style="mso-spacerun: yes; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}drowned by
the love of money? Or enslaved to vainglory? Or caught up by the other
passions. No one could possibly say that someone with a high fever was
at rest, or that someone shipwrecked was making a good voyage. It simply
isnÂ’t possible. It is impossible for someone who has become dark to be
enlightened, or for someone possessed by sins to celebrate. But for you,
brothers, we are confident of better things, ones that promise
salvation. For our way of life is nothing other than
preparation[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn4){#_ftnref4}
for a feast. Look at the reality: psalmody succeeds psalmody; reading,
reading; study, study; prayer, prayer, like a wheel drawing us and
joining us to God. How truly excellent is this way of life, how
supremely excellent! How blessed this life and thrice-blessed! So then,
since we have been shown the sought for Pascha, my honoured brothers,
let us make it our aim, and, as far as we can, celebrate it every day,
through the death of the passions and the resurrection of the virtues,
in imitation of the Lord, *because he too suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow in his
steps*.[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn5){#_ftnref5}
And I say this, not so we become judges of the others Â—*for each has
their own load to carry*[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}](#_ftn6){#_ftnref6}Â—but
so that, conscious of the grace that has been given us by God, we may
give thanks to the giver, glorify the benefactor, repay the master, who
has not only granted our present blessings, but also, to those who
genuinely serve him to the end, he will also give those that are in his
promises, that eternal and heavenly Pascha. May we all attain it, by the
grace and love for humankind of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and always, and to
the ages of ages.
Amen.]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-language: HE"}]{style="mso-bidi-font-size: 12.0pt"}[]{style="font-size:14.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:12.0pt"}

<div style="mso-element:footnote-list">

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div id="ftn1" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[1\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref1){#_ftn1}[
Psalm 143:4.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn2" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[2\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref2){#_ftn2}[
Colossians 3:5.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn3" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[3\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref3){#_ftn3}[
Cf. Philippians
3:19.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn4" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[4\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref4){#_ftn4}[
The ordinary Greek word for Â‘preparationÂ’, *paraskevi*, in Christian
Greek also means Friday, in particular Good Friday, the Â‘preparationÂ’
for Pascha.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn5" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[5\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref5){#_ftn5}[
1 Peter 2:21. The critical editions have the second person
throughout.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

<div id="ftn6" style="mso-element:footnote">

[[\[6\]]{.MsoFootnoteReference
style="mso-special-character: footnote; font-size: 12.0pt; mso-bidi-font-size: 10.0pt"}](#_ftnref6){#_ftn6}[
Galatians 6:5.]{style="font-size:12.0pt;mso-bidi-font-size:10.0pt"}

</div>

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
