\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](lent.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 103](catechesis_103.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 40](ths40.md) \]
\[ [Catechesis 49](catechesis_49.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 50-56](ths50-56.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 57-59](ths57-59.md) \] \[ Catecheses 60-64 \]
\[ [Catecheses 66 & 67](ths66-67.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 68-70](ths68-70.md) \]
\[ [Catecheses 72-73](ths72-73.md) \]

## INTRODUCTION

Catechesis 60 contains a number of interesting details. Who, for
example, if the ‘holy father and teacher’ referred to in the opening
sentence? If the Short Catecheses were given during St Theodore’s exile
to the Propontis in 820, it cannot be St Platon, who had died in 812.
The most likely person is St Nikephoros, the Patriarch. The latter,
despite certain earlier difficulties, had a great respect for St
Theodore. Cf. in particular *Life A* chap. 120 \[PG 99:221-224\]. The
Patriarch called himself St Theodore’s ‘son’ \[Letters II:79 — PG
99:1317C\], and St Theodore refers to himself as the Patriarch’s ‘child’
\[ibid. II:18. PG 99:1176A\]. St Nikephoros had been deposed in 815 and
was at this time also in exile in his own monastery on the Propontis.
That he should visit his friend St Theodore and his monks is, to say the
least, not improbable.

The reference to ‘the story of the Flood’ suggests that the readings at
Vespers were the same in St Theodore’s day as they are today.

In number 63 the reference to ‘the ruler’ in Bulgaria is almost
certainly to Omurgat (813-831), whose father, Kroumos (802-814) had
carried off into captivity some 30,000 Christians some years before. If
the Catecheses were all given at the same time, they must be dated
between 820 (the death of Metropolitan Michael, the subject of
Catechesis 21) and 826 (the death of St Theodore himself).

# CATECHESIS 60

On our sudden departure from here and teaching about keeping safe watch
over our senses and our mind from unseemly desires. Given on Wednesday
of the 3rd Week.

Brethren and fathers, in the presence of our holy father and teacher we
have no need to discourse; but nevertheless because of our custom let us
say just a little. Day by day our life, as you see, is passing and we
are getting nearer to death, and we must remove hence and be joined to
our brothers and fathers; so that there is need of much vigilance and
attention and preparation of heart. We hear the story of the Flood being
read, and the Lord in the Gospels saying: As in the days of Noë they
were eating, drinking, marrying, buying, selling and suddenly the flood
came, so too it will be at the coming of the Son of Man \[Cf Mt
24,37-39, Lk 17,26s. St Theodore is quoting from memory\]. And perhaps
we wonder in this case how insensibly they were disposed, and were not
rather trembling and terrified. Let us be on the watch then lest we find
ourselves without realising it in the same state of which we accuse
them. Already it is not the ark which is being got ready, which was
being filled up during one hundred years, but every day the tomb is seen
filled, into which we are about to crawl. Already each day death is at
work \[Cf. 2 Cor 4,12.\], when each one of our brothers departs. Things
here are more fearful than those there; and so we should be on our
guard. I don’t say: we shouldn’t eat, drink, or clothe ourselves. I
don’t say that; *but whether we eat, or drink, or whatever we do, let
us do everything to the glory of God*, \[1 Cor 10,31-32.\] giving no
offence to Jews or Greeks or to the Church of God, as the Apostle
teaches.

Yes, I exhort, yes, I implore, my brothers, *make my joy complete*, as
the Apostle again says, *be of the same mind, having the same love,
being in full accord and of one mind. Do nothing from selfish ambition
or vainglory; but in humility think of others as better than yourselves*
\[Phil 2,2-3.\]. Let us secure our senses, sight, hearing, smell, taste,
touch, through them death enters. Let us bridle our mind not to be
carried off to things it should not, not to step into the pitfall of
unseemly things, not to picture to ourselves evil images nor to conceive
sinful desires, from which we gain no profit or pleasure; on the
contrary we are pained and crushed accomplishing nothing useful. There
is one repose then and one pleasure, to cleanse the soul and to look
towards dispassion. And let us not grow despondent \[The verb from
*akedia.*\] when called to repose and the joy of dispassion, but let us
hasten and press forward intently with diligence to right every defect;
and God is our helper; for the Lord is near those who wait for him. And
by living thus may we reach the kingdom of heaven in Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be glory and might with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
now and ever and to the ages of ages. Amen.

# CATECHESIS 61

That we must not submit ourselves in temptations, and about fasting.  
Given on Friday of the 3rd Week.

Brethren and fathers, yesterday a tempest and to-day calm; yesterday a
\<disturbance\> \[1\]  and today quiet; but blessed is God, who has also
dispelled the trial and given you power to remain unmoved in the
expectation of threats. This is the way of true Christians, this is the
way of authentic monks, to hold themselves always in readiness in the
face of dangers on behalf of virtue and to consider nothing more
precious that the commandment of God. Those who came said what they
said, and they left not so much amazed as ashamed; while to you may the
Lord grant the perfect reward in return for your having chosen to be
persecuted for his sake; and being rich in mercy he knows how to crown
from the intention alone the one who chooses the good. But in fact the
trial has not been dispelled, but again and again it continues, and
particularly because everywhere there are edicts of the rulers that no
one is to lag behind from having a share in heretical fellowship. And so
let us hear the Apostle when he says, *Conduct yourselves wisely toward
outsiders, making the most of the opportunity. Let your speech be always
gracious, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how you should
respond to each one* \[Col 4,5-6.\]. By this he teaches us that we
should not submit just anyhow to trials, nor should we pass God’s word
over in silence, for he says, *My soul takes no pleasure in anyone who
draws back* \[Heb 10,8 = Hab 2,4\]. But that’s enough of these matters.

Already the fast has advanced and lays on us, brethren, the task of
pressing on eagerly again and again to what follows as each has chosen,
not reluctantly or under constraint; *for God loves a cheerful* faster
\[1 Cor. 9,7. St Paul, of course, has ‘giver’.\]. Except that the
coenobitic rule does not let each one act according to their own will;
but this is the common limit of self-mastery for those living in
obedience: the cutting of their own will. Fasting then is good, because
it tames the passions and subjects the flesh to the spirit; weeping is
good, because it wipes clean and washes the heart of sins and sets it
pure before the Lord; prayer is good, because it gives the mind wings
and makes it a companion of God; love is good, because it disregards
what concerns itself for the advantage of the neighbour; zeal is good,
because it lightens toils and makes the spirit young, as it makes the
elder young again. Therefore let us become cheerful, let us be eager.
The moment for psalmody? Let us advance keenly. The moment for work? Let
us work earnestly. The moment for stillness? Let us be still reasonably.
The time for talk? Let us talk suitably. And to speak simply, doing
*everything decently and in order*,\[1 Cor. 14,40.\] as we have been
instructed; let us remain outside tumult and all idle chatter. Let the
measure of genuflexions be completed and the customary recitation be
fulfilled, according to each one’s power, while watch is kept over the
body’s health. And would that the God of peace might bring us to the
queen of days, to the resurrection of Christ, and make us worthy of the
kingdom of heaven, where there is *no food and drink, but justice and
peace and joy*, as it is written, *in the Holy Spirit* \[Rom. 14,17.\].
Would that we might share in them richly, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to
whom be glory and might, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and
always and to the ages of ages. Amen.

-----

\[1\] The Greek has *diatheke*, which means a ‘disposition’, in the
sense of a ‘will’ or ‘testament’. In the LXX and NT it is the regular
word for ‘covenant’. It does not seem to make any sense in the context,
though Moulton Milligan’s comment on the word is interesting:
‘*diatheke* is properly disposition, an ‘arrangement’ made by one
party with plenary power, which the other party may accept or reject,
but cannot alter.’ Migne has ‘tumultus’, but since it does not print the
Greek, whether this represents a different text, or is simply a guess to
fit the sense is unclear. The text as it stands may be corrupt, unless
*diatheke* can be taken in the sense of something like an ‘ultimatum’.

# CATECHESIS 62

On our imitating the Lord’s sufferings.  
\[Migne adds: *On the Forty Martyrs* \[March 9th\]. But it seems to have
been given after the day itself.\]

Brethren and fathers, how good it has become for us the separation from
the monastery here\! *For why should our liberty be subject to the
judgement of another’s conscience*? \[1 Cor. 10,29.\] And why do we
maltreat ourselves still for what is of no use? We managed as far as it
was possible and the moment allowed; but now, because when the moment
summoned they did not choose persecution on behalf of Christ, as certain
others, it is necessary to listen to the Prophet when he says, *Come out
from among them and be separated*, \[Isa. 52,11.\] says the Lord. If
others act otherwise over these matters, they will render an account to
the Lord on the day of judgement; for it seems to me that to be brought
under their power is equivalent of being indifferent towards the
heretics. You see that the same distinction withdraws us from the world
and drives us to trouble, to distress, to hunger, to persecution, to
prison, to death*; but in all these we must be supremely victorious
through the God who loved us*, \[Rom. 8,37. St Theodore seems to be
quoting from memory <sup></sup> \] when, whenever he sees a soul
thirsting for him, gives it force to be able to endure sufferings on his
behalf. And to this the Forty Martyrs, whose memorial we have just
celebrated, bear witness with the others; for we cannot say that they
possessed a different nature to the one we have. But since they loved
God with a true heart, they were empowered in their weakness to throw
down the invisible enemy by the flesh, and to accomplish a struggle of
such a quality and greatness that all Christians praise it in song. And
blessed is one who has been granted to share in the sufferings of
Christ,\[ ** Cf. 1 Pet. 4,13.\] even to some extent at least: the
persecuted, because he too was persecuted; the arrested, because he too
was arrested; the reviled, because he too was reviled; the scourged,
because he too was scourged; the imprisoned, because he too was
imprisoned; see too why it is written, *If we have died with him, we
shall also live with him; if we endure, we shall also reign with him; if
we deny, he too will deny us; if we are faithless, he remains faithful;
he is not able to deny himself*. \[2 Tim. 2,11-13\] Do you see the
promises and the threats, of what sort and how great they are? For the
rest then, brethren, let us strive, let us struggle by the grace of
Christ not to shame those things that have been previously mentioned,
the banishments, the imprisonments, the scourgings. We may not all have
been imprisoned, nor all scourged; but nevertheless the fellowship of
life itself becomes a fellowship of sufferings, *for if one limb
suffers, all the limbs suffer with it; if one limb is glorified, all the
limbs rejoice with it*. \[1 Cor. 12,26\] And would that we were even
*more one body and one spirit, as we have been called in one hope of our
calling*, \[Eph. 4,4.\] having Christ as the head, to become
well-pleasing to God, to gain the kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be glory and might with the Father and the Holy Spirit,
now and always and to the ages of ages. Amen.

# CATECHESIS 63

Historical, concerning the Christians who were massacred in Bulgaria
during the holy Lent, on account of meat-eating. On the 3rd Sunday.

Brethren and fathers, in the present instruction I want to urge you to
consolation from a certain story. The story is this: In Bulgaria, as
those who were accurately informed have reported, an evil decree went
out from the ruler there that the Christians in captivity and our
brothers were to eat meat during the period of the holy Forty Days;
those who obeyed would live, those who disobeyed would be killed. The
word of the godless was exceedingly strong and the people assembled and
there was weeping and groans and much lamentation with women and
children, on the one side of those clinging to the Christian law, on the
other of those quailing before the death of the flesh. Finally — ah, the
pitiable announcement — they were defeated and submitted to the godless
order. Fourteen of them though broke away and stood apart saying it was
not possible either to obey or to eat meat in violation of the Christian
law. At this, appeals and exhortations by the people: Let them yield to
constraint, not die foolishly, and through repentance they can be
restored again. But nothing could persuade them or weaken them from
keeping their gaze fixed on God and on the blessedness that was laid up
in his promises. The Scythian then, when he saw the implacable
determination of the men, thought to subdue the rest by means of one,
and having slain him he at once distributed his children and his wife
among the Scythians as slaves, so that the others weakened by this would
be brought over. But they rather remained unbowed and shouted out, ‘We
are Christians, and our lot is that of our dead brother’. At this
confession they were crucified on planks and died in the Lord. You see,
therefore, brethren, that even now too the Gospel of the kingdom of God
is active. *One who loves father or mother*, it says, *more than me is
not worthy of me; and one who loves son or daughter or wife more than me
is not worthy of me; and one who does not take up his cross and follow
after me, is not worthy of me* \[Matt. 10,37-38\]. And again, *Do not
fear those who kill the body, but cannot kill the soul; rather fear one
who can destroy both soul and body in Gehenna* \[Matt. 10,28.\]. They
were obedient then to the commands of the Gospel, they obeyed the
authority of the Lord and were wreathed with the crown of martyrdom,
imitating the holy Maccabees and doubling their number, for the
Maccabees were seven, but they were fourteen; the former so as not to
taste swine’s meat in violation of the law, the latter so as not to
partake of any meat in violation of the Christian rule; this latter
seems stricter, because for the Maccabees partaking of pork was utterly
forbidden, but for these men it was permissible to partake of any meat
under necessity, as St Basil says. But since the order from the
Scythians was aimed at the rejection of the faith, they refused; but
they considered all things as secondary for the love of Christ. O
blessed men\! O blessed action\! in a single instant to have received in
exchange eternal rest\! What will they say to this, those who deny that
heretical communion is a breach of faith? For if there there was a
breach of faith by the people over eating meat, how much more here over
the heretically sacrificed communion. Where too are those who say that
there is no ground for martyrdom in the image of Christ? For if there
there was ground for martyrdom for those who did not eat meat, how much
more here is the ground for martyrdom resplendent for those who have not
denied. But the heretics, because they are dark themselves, also speak
things that are dark as they try to embroil others in their own falls.

But let us, brethren, glorify our good God, who glorifies those who have
glorified him, who reveals martyrs in this generation too, as we reflect
on the fact that if men who were apparently lowly, uneducated, married
and with children gave everything up for the love of Christ, how much
more should we, who are unmarried and outside the world, when the moment
calls, become as zealous as the saints. But this is for a day when
Christ calls us; now though, let us stand firm for the uninterrupted
martyrdom according to the conscience. Let us not bow the knee to Baal,
brethren, and let us not give in when struck by the thoughts \[‘The
thoughts’, *logismoi*, are a technical term in the monastic literature
and I retain the slightly awkward definite article in English. The
expression is effectively synonymous with ‘the demons’. See the
important treatment by Prof. A. Guillaumont in Évagre le Pontique.
*Traité Pratique ou le Moine*, tom. 1, pp. 54-98 \[SC 170\]\]; let us
rather quench the fiery arrows of the evil one with tears, with
supplications, with compunction, with the other batterings of the body,
so that we too may be able to say with the Apostle*, Every day I die,
that is as certain as the boast in you, which I have in Christ Jesus our
Lord* \[1 Cor. 15:31.\]; and with the holy David*, Because for you we
die all the day, we were reckoned as sheep for the slaughter* \[Ps.
43:23.\]. With them may we be found worthy to become heirs of the
kingdom of heaven, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory and might,
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever and to the ages of
ages. Amen.

# CATECHESIS 64

On the incarnate dispensation of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that we
should celebrate spiritually. It was spoken on the day of the
Annunciation.

Brethren and fathers, the Annunciation is here and it is the first of
the Feasts of the Lord, and we should not simply celebrate as most do,
but with understanding and with reverence for the mystery. What is the
mystery? That the Son of God becomes son of man, using the holy Virgin
as the means, dwelling in her and from her fashioning for himself a
temple and becoming perfect man. Why so? *That he might ransom those
under the law, as it is written, and that we might receive sonship*
\[Gal. 4,5.\]; that we may no longer be slaves, but free; no longer
subject to the passions, but free of passions; no longer friends of the
world, but friends of God; no longer walking according to the flesh, but
according to the spirit. *Those who walk according to the flesh, think
the things of the flesh; those who walk according to the spirit, the
things of the spirit; for the thought of the flesh is death; but the
thought of the spirit, life and peace. And so the thought of the flesh
is hostile to God, for it is not subject to the law of God. Indeed it
cannot be. Those who are in the flesh cannot please God* \[Rom.
8,5-8.\]. In brief this is the power of the mystery, and this is why we
should celebrate spiritually and behave spiritually, with holiness and
justice, with love, with gentleness, with peace, *with forbearance, with
goodness, with the Holy Spirit* \[2 Cor. 6,6.\], so that as far as we
ourselves are concerned we do not render the dispensation of our Lord
Jesus Christ empty and ineffectual. Not only that, but we should both
pray and grieve for the world. Why so? Because the Son of God came to
save the world, and the world rejects him. Tribes and languages reject
him; the barbarian nations reject him, those who have had his holy name
invoked upon them reject him, some through abandoning the faith, others
through their evil lives. What should he have done and did not do? Being
God he became man, *he humbled himself, becoming obedient unto death,
the death of the cross* \[Phil. 2,8.\]; he gave us his body to eat and
his blood to drink; he allowed us to call him Father, Brother, Head,
Teacher, Bridegroom, Fellow-heir and all the other titles which there is
no time to mention now. And still he is rejected, and still he bears it.
*For*, he says, *I have not come to judge the world, but to save the
world* \[John 12,47.\]. What then is there to say, brethren? That the
genuine disciples are grieved by the rejections of their
fellow-disciples, thus showing love both for the teacher and for the
disciples. So too, genuine servants suffer in the same way from the
desertions of their fellow-servants. This is why the great Apostle
orders that *we should offer supplications, prayers, entreaties,
thanksgivings on behalf of all mankind, for kings and for all in high
positions* \[1 Tim. 2,1-2*.*\]; and elsewhere he says this on the
subject, I *speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie, my conscience bears
witness with me in the Holy Spirit, that I have a great grief and
unceasing anguish in my heart; for I have prayed that I might be
anathema to Christ for the sake of my brethren, my kinsmen according to
the flesh* \[Rom. 9,1-3.\]. You see the power of love? You see the
height of friendship? Moses shows it too when he says to God, *If you
will forgive them their sin, forgive; if not, wipe me out of the book
which you have written* \[Exodus 32,32\]. So we too, as genuine and not
counterfeit disciples, should not only look to what concerns ourselves,
but we should grieve and pray for our brothers and for the whole world;
for by so doing what is pleasing to the Lord we shall become inheritors
of eternal life, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be the glory and the
might with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever, and to the
ages of ages. Amen. 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

