**ON THURSDAY MORNING**

## AT MATINS

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of the Apostles.

Tone 2.

Christ God, who with ineffable love mankind made the Fishermen wiser
than the learned and sent them out as heralds to all the earth, through
them strengthen your Church and send down upon the faithful your
blessing, as you alone are merciful and love mankind.

Verse: Their sound has gone out into all the earth, and their words to
the ends of the world.

Christ God, the Fishermen caught the nations in their net and taught the
ends of the earth to worship you with the Father and the Spirit, through
them establish the Faith inspired by God and send down upon the peoples
your mercies, who alone rest among the Saints.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

We have become partakers in divine nature through you, Ever-virgin; for
your gave birth to God incarnate for our sake; and so, as is fitting, we
all devoutly magnify you.

After the 2nd Reading, other Kathismata of the Apostles.

God, who became poor by compassion, sent you out wealthy into the world,
showing by your poverty the heavenly wealth of their preaching. Made
wealthy through them with the Faith inspired by God we devoutly sing the
praise, Apostles, of your memory.

Verse: The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament proclaims
the work of his hands.

As Disciples and eyewitnesses of the Wisdom of God, the godly Apostles
poured scorn on the unwise wisdom of the wise and the learned, making
the nations wise by the simplicity of their preaching to sing the praise
with right belief of the Creator and only Lord.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

You are the helper of those in affliction, Bearer of God, and the
defender of those under constraints, granting hope to the despairing,
cleansing the diseases of the incurable, all-praised Mother of God; and
so intercede for us to the Lord.

After the 3rd Reading, other Kathismata, of St Nicolas.

With the beams of your wonders, Nicolas, you make the whole expanse of
the earth radiant, you dispel the gloom of afflictions and drive off the
assault of dangers, for you are a most fervent protector.

Verse: God is wonderful in Saints, the God of Israel.

Of the Martyrs.

Apostles, Martyrs, Prophets and Hierarchs, Holy and Righteous Ones,
having nobly completed the struggle and kept the Faith, as you have
boldness towards the Saviour, we beseech you intercede for us with him,
as he is good, that our souls may be saved.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Immaculate Virgin, who alone bore God without seed and remained pure
after your awesome child-bearing, I fall down before you crying with
fear and faith: Save me from passions and diseases and from every
constraint.

Canon of the Holy Apostles.

Ode 1. Tone 2. Irmos.

”The overwhelming might once laid low in the deep all Pharaoh’s host;
but the incarnate Word, the glorious Lord, has wiped out malignant sin:
for he has been greatly glorified”.

Troparia.

By faith becoming lighting ashes of the divine light, radiant Apostles
of the Saviour, illumine me wholly, who am darkened by the blackness of
pleasures, and pass my whole life in indifference.

Disciples and friends of Christ, rescue me from the Enemy, whose friend
I have become through my propensity for evils, by rousing my soul to the
love of the One who has become the friend of the race of mortals through
his loving kindness.

My base soul, before you die, hurry, repent and grieve for yourself who
have been slain, so that the One who in his compassion raised up Lazarus
after four days may raise you also at the pleadings of the Apostles.

Theotokion.

All-pure, All-blameless, who bore the God of blessings who makes all
those held fast by corruption good, implore him with the Prophets,
Martyrs and Apostles that all may be rescued from transgression.

Another Canon, to St Nicolas, of which the Acrostic is:  
I sing you, Nicolas, a godly song.

The same Irmos.

Standing at Christ’s tribunal, all-wise Nicolas, with the hosts of
Angels, wearing a crown of victory, grant me illumination to enlighten
the darkness of my soul, that with joy I may praise your memorial, O
All-blessed.

The Lord who glorifies all who glorify him has given you as a refuge for
the faithful, delivering from temptations those who have recourse to
your protection, Nicolas All-revered, and who call on you with faith and
love.

Theotokion.

The all wicked serpent by planting in me the longing to be made equal
with the Creator took me prisoner. Through you, O All-pure, I have been
recalled and most truly made divine, for you, God’s Mother, gave birth
to the One who deified me.

Ode 3. Irmos.

”The desert, the barren Church of the nations, flowered like a lily at
your coming, Lord, by which my heart has been established”.

Troparia.

Glorious and worthy Apostles who saw God, having gained by the Spirit
the Wisdom of the Father as your Teacher you made the wisdom of the
Greeks insipid.

Abolish the barrenness of my soul, All-praised Apostles, and make me
bear the fair offspring of virtuous deeds, as the all-revered
eye-witnesses of the Word.

At the entreaties of your Apostles, most merciful Benefactor of all,
heal me who am now grievously poisoned by the noxious bite of the Enemy.

Theotokion.

With all the Apostles, O All-pure, implore Christ, the supremely good,
that those who sing your praise may be delivered from every harm,
disaster and dangers.

Of the Saint. The same Irmos.

Blessed Nicolas, who became a true disciple of the Master, you save from
dire dangers and bitter death those who have recourse to you.

Have pity on your servants, granting them as you are good forgiveness of
faults at the intercessions of your servant Nicolas, O most merciful.

Theotokion.

Lull the tumult of my passions, and govern my life, All-holy Lady who
gave birth to God, in whom my heart has been established.

Ode 4. Irmos.

”You came from a Virgin, not an ambassador, not an Angel, but the Lord
himself incarnate, and saved me, humanity, entirely; therefore I cry to
you: Glory to your power, O Lord\!” 

Troparia.

As I hunger and waste away through famine each day, fill me with the
food of salvation, O only Immortal, at the godly entreaties of those who
proclaimed you to the entire world.

You made all your far-famed Apostles mount upon the sea of the world,
Lover of mankind, troubling the bitter waters of its salt-sea unbelief.

All-praised Apostles, who made Christ the Sun dawn for those in
darkness, enlighten me who lie in the darkness of sin, shutting out evil
desires from heart.

Theotokion.

All-praised, who gave birth to God who is above praise, intercede
together with the Apostles on behalf of those who sing your praise that
we may be delivered from sins, dangers and eternal punishment.

Of the Saint. The same Irmos.

In purity familiar with the rays of the Spirit, you have become a bearer
of light illumining the ends of the world, an advocate for all, saving
all those who glorify you in faith.

As you once appeared rescuing the Youths from death, Venerable and
All-blessed, so now too save me from every calamity and from temptations
and dangers.

You blazed with the brilliant gleams of virtues, All-blessed, becoming a
most noble imitator of your Master, while when called on you save those
who glorify you with piety and love.

Theotokion.

The Master of creation came upon you when he was about to take a body,
and save the whole of me, humanity, as he is compassionate; and so all
we believers reverence you as Mother of God.

Ode 5. Irmos.

”O Christ you have become the Mediator between God and men, for through
you, Master, from the night of ignorance we have access to your Father,
the source of light.”

Troparia.

The great Shepherd sent out his godly Disciples like sheep among wolves,
remodelling them by the divine strength of Baptism and by the beauty of
his words.

By the divine light, Apostles, you enlightened the hearts in the gloom
of error; therefore I beseech you, Blessed ones, enlighten me who have
been darkened by the blackness of pleasures.

Theotokion.

Dwelling place of Light, shine on me who lie in darkness with your
light, and with the Apostles intercede that by your prayers I may be
saved from every constraint.

**Of the Saint. Another Irmos.  
The enlightment.**

Resplendent by a way of life befitting God, Thrice-blessed, you defended
and rescued those condemned to die by an unjust sentence as they cried
to the Master Christ: We know no other God but you.

As you now contemplate in heaven the eternal glory and delight in the
resplendent rays of the ineffable and divine radiance, shelter me by
your protection, Venerable and all-revered servant of Christ.

**Theotokion.**

To seek out your Image, demolished by unnumbered passions, my Christ,
Word of God, unknown to the heavenly beings you appeared incarnate from
a Virgin to those who cry to you: We know no other God but you.

**Ode 6. Irmos.**

”Surrounded by a depth of offences, I call upon the unsearchable depth
of your compassion: O God, lead me up from corruption.”

**Troparia.**

Disciples of the Saviour, who furnish the living water, give drink, I
beg, to my soul, burned up by the heat of sin.

Named spiritual heavens, O Apostles who shed the divine light, you
declare the ineffable glory of God. Intercede that we may all obtain it.

Tossed on an ocean of dangers, I come to you, the Pilot of the universe;
through your Apostles direct me to a roadstead of salvation.

**Theotokion.**

With all the Powers on high, with your Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs I
bring you your Mother as means of atonement. Take pity, save me.

**Of the Saint. Same Irmos.**

The crown of victory is worthily set upon your head, Nicolas; as noblest
victor save those who call upon you.

Slain by my faults and drowning in the waves of the passions, appear and
bring me safe, blessed Saint, to the haven of the divine will.

**Theotokion.**

I have laid my hopes of salvation on you, Mother, Ever-virgin, and I
place you as the sure and unshakeable protectress of my life.

**Ode 7. Irmos**

”The godless order of a lawless tyrant fanned the soaring flame; but
Christ let fall the dew of the Spirit upon the God-fearing Youths. He is
blessed and highly exalted.”

**Troparia.**

Set flame by the fire of the divine Spirit, O Apostles, you quenched the
coals of error, while you lit the fire of the love of God in the minds
of the faithful; and so with resounding voice we honour you.

Hating the world and the things of the world, you loved Christ, who in
the world with a body conversed with mortals; implore him, godly
Apostles, to free me from the perils of life.

Judge most just who know the heart, who alone know my secret offences,
at the entreaties of your Apostles do not condemn me at the hour of the
judgement, do not banish me to fire.

**Theotokion.**

Virgin who knew not wedlock, you bore ineffably the fire of the Godhead
and were not consumed, and so , Pure lady, with the Apostles intercede
to free me, who glorify you, from the everlasting flame.

**Of the Saint. Another Irmos.  
The three Youths.**

Pierced through by harsh temptation I have fallen grievously, and cast
down by despondency I have drawn near to the gates of Hell. Save me by
your intercessions, Blessed Father, and raise me up to sing to you: I
ever call you blessed, sacred Servant of Christ.

Resplendent with the immaterial beams of the light which never sets,
snatch out those held fast by the darkness of afflictions and guide them
to the illumination of true religion as they sing: We ever call you
blessed, true Servant of Christ.

**Theotokion.**

Implore Christ your Son and God, Mother of God, to draw up by his
precious those destroyed by grave falls and the deceptions of the
serpent, who sing: God of our Fathers, blessed are you.

**Ode 8. Irmos.**

”A furnace once in Babylon, by divine decree, divided its action,
burning up the Chaldeans but refreshing the faithful who sang: All you
works of the Lord, bless the Lord”.

**Troparia.**

In bodily form the Comforter Spirit came upon you in the form of fire
and made you lamps which consumed the ungodly but illumined all the
devout, godly Apostles of the Word.

O Compassionate, at the supplications of your Disciples heal the
passions which grievously batter my incurable heart, I beg, lead my soul
to light, guide my mind which inclines to wickedness.

Groan, my soul, and weep intensely, and grieve for yourself before the
end, before the lamentation which cannot be comforted takes hold of you,
and cry out to the Creator: Master, take pity on me at the entreaties of
the Apostles.

**Theotokion.**

The furnace that once did not consume the Youths prefigured your
child-bearing, all-immaculate Virgin; therefore I implore you, with all
the Apostles and prophets entreat that I may be delivered from the fire
of hell.

**Of the Saint. Another Irmos.  
God who came down.**

As you are kindly and compassionate, blessed Initiator into sacred
mysteries, free those encompassed by the deep of temptations, granting
them release from the troubles that hold them fast by your entreaties to
the Saviour.

Guide into mysteries beyond the mind, minister of things immaterial and
heavenly, and faithful High Priest you have been declared, O Initiator
inspired by God. Ask from our Saviour forgiveness of faults.

**Theotokion.**

My mind is now enfeebled, having fallen into the depths of dishonour, so
that it is therefore very close to evils of many kinds; but do you, O
Virgin, heal it, by wrapping it in the light of dispassion.

**Ode 9. Irmos.**

”The Son of the Father without beginning, God and Word, incarnate of a
Virgin, has appeared to us, to give light to what is darkened, to gather
what is scattered; therefore we magnify the all-praised Mother of God”.

**Troparia.**

I am condemned, I am beyond correction, for I have despised your
ordinances and followed in mad folly the wiles of the demons. Turn me
back again, O Lord, at the prayers of your Apostles.

Glorious Apostles, blessed Apostles, Disciples of the Saviour, all-wise
Heralds, rescue me from all harm, all wrath, all sin, all disaster and
transgression of every kind.

I offer a soul beyond correction, a conscience buried beneath the stuff
of offences, a heart defiled and thought befouled. I cry to you, Lover
of mankind: Take pity on me in your mercy.

**Theotokion.**

All-pure Virgin, the Apostles proclaimed your Son to all the world as
God and Man. Therefore with them entreat that on the dread day of
judgement all those who faithfully magnify you may be delivered.

**Of the Saint. The same Irmos.**

Illumined by the lamps of grace, inspired Father, and having become a
wise beacon of true religion, you save those in temptations, rescue
those in the depth of the sea and wondrously nourish the starving, O
all-blessed.

Now encamped in the Paradise of delight and contemplating clearly the
ineffable glory, you look from the vaults of heaven upon those who sing
your praises and rescue them from passions, all-honoured God-bearer.

**Theotokion.**

Pure Mother of God, you conceived the Wisdom, Power and empersonned Word
of the Father, Wisdom which took its temple from your immaculate blood,
and was united to, by a union that was unbroken.

**At the Aposticha of Lauds, of the Apostles.**

You have magnified the names of the Princes of the Apostles in the
inhabited world, O Saviour. They learned the ineffable mysteries of
heaven, they gave healings to those on earth, and their shadows alone
cured the passions. The one who was a fisherman worked wonders; the one
who was a Jew taught the doctrines of grace. Through them, O
Compassionate, grant us your great mercy.

We who are warred upon from every side and take refuge in you, who alone
are truly God, offer you the words of your Disciples as we say: Save us,
Teacher, we are perishing. Show now also to our enemies, we beg, that
you protect your people and save them from dangers at the intercession
of the Apostles, overlooking their sins through your great goodness.
Lord, glory to you.

**Of the Martyrs.**

Every city, town and village honours your relics, Martyrs and Champions;
for you struggled like professionals and received a heavenly crown, and
therefore you are the boast of priests, the victory of Kings and the
splendour of Churches.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Joy of all the afflicted and defence of the wronged, nourishment of the
hungry and consolation of strangers, harbour of the storm-tossed,
visitation of the sick, shelter and assistance of the oppressed and
staff of the blind, Mother of God Most High; therefore we all fall down
before you, deliver us from every calamity.

## AT THE LITURGY

**The Beatitudes.**

We bring you the words of the Thief and we cry to you: Remember us,
Saviour, in your Kingdom.

All-wise Apostles, you passed through all the regions of the world and
delivered mortals from the darkness of error.

With the net of grace, wise Initiates, you clearly drew up humans from
the deep of vain folly.

**Of the Martyrs.**

Champions of Christ, who finished the course and kept the faith, with
one accord we let us sing your praise.

Glory.

Let all us believers now glorify in fear the Son, equal in operation
with the Begetter, together with the Spirit.

Both now. Theotokion.

Pure Virgin, you are the boast of Apostles, ornament of Athletes and
salvation of the world.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 10 May 2009**

