\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone4.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat4ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun4nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins and Liturgy](sun4mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins3.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins3.md) \] \[ Thursday Matins \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers3.md) \]

ON THURSDAY MORNING

AT MATINS.

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of the Apostles.

Tone 4.

Princes of the Apostles and teachers of the whole world intercede with
the Master of all things to grant peace to the whole world and to our
souls his great mercy.

Verse: Their sound has gone out into all the earth; and their words to
the ends of the world.

You appointed your Disciples, O Christ, as beacons shining to the ends
of the earth, illumining souls by their preaching, through them
dispelling the deception of idols and flooding the world with the rays
of the doctrines of true religion. At their intercessions save our
souls.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. The same melody.

Swiftly accept our supplications, Sovereign Lady, and bring them before
your Son and God, pure Virgin; destroy the troubles of those who have
recourse to you, scatter the ambushes and the insolent assaults of those
who are now in arms against your servants.

After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter, other Kathismata.

Your voice has gone out into all the earth, glorious Apostles, and
turned the unwise wisdom of error into folly, drawn all mankind from the
abyss of deception and shown to all the path of salvation; therefore we
now rightly call you blessed.

Verse: The heavens confess your wonders, Lord; and your truth in the
Church of the Saints.

You appointed your Disciples, O Saviour, as heralds of the Faith,
guiding the nations through them to knowledge of you; for with the rays
of their words they enlightened all mankind, by truly sowing the seed of
true religion. At their intercessions save our souls.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. The same melody.

Hearken, Sovereign Lady, to your servant who cries from a grieving soul
and grant me forgiveness of my many wicked deeds; for I have you as
protection both day and night; deliver me, Mother of God, from the fire
of hell, and set me on the right hand of your Son and God.

After the 3rd Reading from the Psalter, other Kathismata.

Come swiftly, Father Nicholas, and save your servants from the dangers
and tribulations that beset us; for you have boldness towards the
Creator and God; come swiftly then to those who call on you in faith,
granting them your present protection and shelter.

Verse:* *God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

Of the Martyrs.

Your Martyrs, O Lord, by their struggle obtained the crowns of
incorruption from you, our God; for with your might they destroyed
tyrants and vanquished the feeble insolence of the demons; at their
intercessions, O Christ God, save our souls.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Unable to praise you worthily because you are higher than every creature
we beg you, Mother of God, freely have mercy on us.

Canon of the Holy Apostles.

Ode 1. Tone 4. Irmos.

Through the Red Sea’s deep the Israel of old marched dryshod, and by
Moses’ hands, outstretched in the form of a cross, routed the power of
Amalek in the wilderness.

Troparia.

The glorious Apostles of Christ as the godly instruments of the
Paraclete, ever guided by his divine inspiration, truly sang for us a
saving melody.

Glorious Eye-witnesses of Christ make me, who lie on a bed of sloth and
whose soul is harshly subject to the deadly disease of sin, worthy of
your visitation.

O Apostles who by reason destroyed the unreason of the nations,
enlighten with the grace of the Paraclete my heart, fearfully darkened
by irrational deeds.

Theotokion.

Virgin who remained incorrupt after child-birth when you bore beyond
reason the One who for us appeared on earth, implore him to enlighten
our souls.

Another Canon, of St Nicholas, whose acrostic is:

This is the fourth song for Nicholas. Joseph.

Irmos.

\[Mighty captains third in rank, the third part of the soul, drown in a
deep of dispassion, I beg, O Born of a Virgin, that as on a timbrel I
may by putting the body to death sing you a song of victory.\]

Troparia.

As you have inherited the life without sorrow, Blessed one, and are ever
full of spiritual joy, dispel from my soul every sorrow I pray, that
with  joy I may glorify you, holy Father Nicholas.

You have been placed as a lamp on a lampstand of lofty virtues shedding
light on the hearts of the faithful, O High Priest Nicholas; therefore I
beg you dispel the darkness of my soul with the rays of your prayers.

The sea of this corruptible life is filled for me with temptations of
every kind; so I y to you and cry: May I have you as my helmsman to
guide me, by your prayers, through the tempest to calm.

Theotokion.

As you have gained unsleeping intercession, O Pure One, put to sleep the
passions of our soul by your sacred mediation, granting godly and saving
awakening for the fulfilment of God’s will.

Ode 3. Irmos.

Your Church, O Christ, rejoices in you and cries: You, Lord, are my
strength, my refuge and my firmament.

Troparia.

O God, the streams of your spiritual rivers, your Disciples, bring
hallowing joy, Master, to your city.

O Citizens of heaven, fellow ministers of the spiritual Hosts, far-famed
Apostles, deliver us from every tribulation.

O Christ, who established the spiritual heavens, establish me at their
prayers on the rock of your will as you are compassionate.

Theotokion.

She who bore you in purity implores you as a Mother, O Lord, with the
choir of the Disciples, to grant us your mercies.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[Let us not boast in wisdom and power and wealth, but in you, O Christ,
the empersonned wisdom of God the Father. For none is holy but you, O
Lover of mankind.\]

Troparia.

You appeared as a sword slaughtering warlike foes; guard us unharmed
from their assault, O Nicholas, by our doing the divine will.

Heal my crushed soul, High Priest, as you crushed the ambushes and
assaults of the foe, that I may honour you as my protector.

As you destroyed the lifeless statues of Artemis, banish the passionate
idols of my mind by your godly mediation, Father Nicholas.

Theotokion.

We have obtained you as protection, All-holy Virgin; change our sorrow
to joy, and free us from the tribulation with breeds death.

Ode 4. Irmos.

Seeing you the Sun of justice raised upon the Cross, the Church stands
in order and fittingly cries out: Glory to your power, O Lord\!

Troparia.

You launched your chosen horses on the sea, O Lover of mankind, for them
to trouble the waters of unbelief, announce to all the true knowledge of
you.

Stars, who make the spiritual firmament of the Church bright with true
religion, glorious Apostles, free me from the night of ignorance and
offences.

O Apostles, proclaimed as sharpened arrows now quench the fiery arrows
of my evil and strengthen my thinking.

Theotokion.

Heal my soul, drugged by the poisoned bites of the enemy, with the
effective medicine of the prayers of her who bore you, O Christ, and of
your sacred Apostles.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[The One seated in glory on the throne of the Godhead, Jesus, the One
above all godhead, has come on a light cloud and with his unsullied palm
has saved those who cry: Glory, O Christ, to your power\!\]

Troparia.

Your glorious life showed you everywhere glorious, celebrated by godly
marvels, beauty of High Priests, boast of all who honour you
harmoniously in song.

On a high throne, O Blessed One, you praised God, dazzling with the
godly  brightness of humility; make us too, wise Father, to have a share
in it by your acceptable intercessions.

Fired with a fitting godlike zeal, Father, you delivered men being led
to death unjustly; therefore we cry: rescue us likewise from dread
temptations which kill the understanding.

Traversing the heavens with joy, Father Nicholas, be present invisibly
with all who call on you, relieving the diseases of our souls, and in
godlike manner giving us respite.

Theotokion.

The armies of the Angels are amazed, All-pure One, as they praise the
greatness of your divine child-bearing; with whom, O Virgin, pray that
all may be saved who with sincere faith call you blessed.

Ode 5. Irmos.

You, Lord, my light, came into the world, a holy light turning from the
darkness of ignorance those who hymn you in faith.

Troparia.

Blossoming clusters of the Vine of life, the glorious Apostles have
given all to drink the wine of spiritual joy.

Guide to the light of God’s commandments, O Apostles, those who
foolishly  dwell in the darkness of spiritual sloth.

Blest Apostles, free us from spiritual falls, from the coming judgement,
from corruption and dangers.

Theotokion.

Save me, O God, as you love mankind, save me at the prayers of her who
ineffably gave you birth and of all your godly Apostles.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[The impious will not see your glory, O Christ, but we, who rise early
in the dawn, sing your praise Only-begotten radiance of the Father’s
Godhead, Lover of humankind.\]

Troparia.

Dying, wise Father, you set like the sun, and you dawned to Christ,
flooding all heaven with the shining beams of your marvels, O Nicholas.

Holy Nicholas, hear us in the day we are beset with temptations and
troubles, calming all their harshness by the grace of the Spirit who
dwells in you.

Crushed in soul by the passions of life, I call on your help, holy
Nicholas; hasten and give me complete healing by imploring him who is
supremely good.

Theotokion.

Seeing you with the eyes of the mind, Isaias cried aloud: Behold, Jesus
the Lord is going to be born of a Maiden, child of God, for the rebirth
of mankind.

Ode 6. Irmos.

I will sacrifice to you with a voice of praise, O Lord, the Church cries
to you, cleansed from the gore of demons by the Blood which owed through
pity from your side.

Troparia.

Chosen by God, the sheep of the Good Shepherd, scattered through the
world, by faith changed all the frenzy of the wolves to the tameness of
sheep.

O Apostles, the fair fruitful trees of the divine Paradise, convert the
fruitlessness of my wretched soul to the fair fruit of a virtuous mind.

I have been wounded by the sword of pleasure and have died. Glorious
Apostles, having received from Christ the grace to raise the dead, give
life to my wretched dead soul.

Theotokion.

Abate the wild tempest of my soul, O God of pity, at the prayers of the
Mother of God who bore you, of the revered Apostles and of your godly
Martyrs.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[I entered the depths of the sea, and a storm of many sins drowned me;
but as God lead my life back from corruption, O most merciful.\]

Troparia.

Strong in the strength of the Saviour you were given power, Godlike
Nicholas, to destroy the invisible foe; from whose dread wounding free
us by your prayers.

All-honoured Nicholas, by your sacred entreaties deliver us from
punishment in Hell, and from the damaging persecution of wicked men.

Of old the generals who were about to die unjustly were delivered at
your intercessions, snatch us like them from every harm, most holy one.

Theotokion.

Your people and your city beg you, All-holy Lady, God’s Mother, rescue
us from every constraint and from the eternal condemnation to come.

Ode 7. Irmos.

The children of Abraham in the Persian furnace, fired by love for true
religion rather than by the flame, cried out: Blessed are you, Lord, in
the temple of your glory.

Troparia.

Unerring Apostles of Christ by the harmony of your all-holy proclamation
you dispelled the winter of error and enlightened the mind of the
faithful with the knowledge of God.

Godly Disciples you are an unending source of sweet-smelling myrrh; fill
those who have recourse to you with the sweet scent of the spiritual
myrrh, and abolish the foul-smelling passions.

Glorious Apostles of the incorrupt Word, I have been utterly corrupted
by the sins of the flesh: save me as I sing: Blessed are you, Lord, in
the temple of your glory.

Theotokion.

The choir of Angels, the choir of Martyrs and of your Apostles, O Word,
Lover of mankind, ever implore your great compassion: have pity on us
all through the Mother of God, as you are compassionate.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[Three Youths in Babylon holding the tyrant’s order to be nonsense,
shouted in the midst of the flame, ‘Blessed are you, God of our
fathers\!’\]

Troparia.

O Holy One, ask him who dwells in the Holy Place to hallow us and send
down upon us his rich mercies.

Glorious One, by becoming holy, upright and meek, mild and humble you
were raised to the height of glory, performing the wonders and marvels
of the priesthood.

Venerable One, having kept the divine laws of God, you appeared as a
most pure temple; therefore we cry to you, O Blessed One, free your
servants from all lawlessness.

Theotokion.

Put to sleep the rebellions of the passions by your unsleeping
intercession; make me waken, O Maiden, by driving far away the slumber
of sloth.

Ode 8. The Irmos.

Stretching out his hands Daniel closed the jaws of the lions in the den;
while the Youth, lovers of true religion, girded with virtue, quenched
the power of the fire as they cried: Bless the Lord, all you works of
the  Lord.

Mouths of Christ breathing fire, you closed the gateless mouths, and
now, having scattered everywhere the saving message, rescue from the
mouth of the spiritual wolf those who cry: All you works, praise the
Lord.

Fair-toned trumpets of Christ, glorious Apostles, sound the trumpet
round my dead soul and rouse it from the tomb of despair and harsh
sloth, to sing: All you works, praise the Lord.

By my mind’s perversity I have trampled down your laws, O Christ; a
prodigal I have slipped into the depths and by evil habit I remain ever
a slave: at the prayers of your Disciples, do not despise me.

Theotokion.

O Mary, Sovereign Lady of the universe, by your prayers free me whose
lord is the serpent and who sin continually, and make me Christ’s
servant in a holy way of life,  that I may sing: All you works, praise
the Lord.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[Almighty Redeemer of the universe, in your condescension you bedewed
the devout Youths in the midst of the flame, and taught them to sing:
All you his works, bless, praise the Lord.\]

Troparia.

Preaching things divine, O Nicholas, you shut the gateless mouths of the
lawless, and delivered from the mischief of Arius many who correctly
praise the Lord.

Your name means victory; make us who ever invoke you in faith, victors
by your prayers over the passions which engender death, over lawless men
and the deceitful tongue.

O Wonderworker Nicholas, be exhorted to send down to us your saving help
in our day of need, on which we ask you faithfully in prayer.

Triadikon.

With right belief let us the faithful worship the holy Trinity,
glorifying the all-holy Father, the Son and Spirit, as we cry: Bless,
praise the Lord.

Theotokion.

Make me worthy of your compassion, O blessed and all-pure, who bore the
most compassionate Word; and in the hour of judgement stand by me,
deliver me, Pure Virgin from that condemnation.

Ode 9. Irmos.

Chosen stones of the Stone laid at the head of the corner, build up on
the rock of the faith the hearts of all the faithful, O Apostles who
overthrew the enemy’s builders.

Having received from Christ the power to bind and loose, loose the bond
of my evils and bind me to Christ, and make me a sharer in God’s
Kingdom, O Apostles.

Godly clouds of the Master now water my heart, dried up by every evil
deed, with glorious showers, and make me fruitful, O Apostles blessed by
God.

Theotokion.

With the Holy Angels, with the godly Apostles, with the glorious
Martyrs,  implore your Son and Lord, O all-pure Mother of God, to save
our souls from perils.

Of the Saint. Another Irmos.

\[Eve by the sickness of disobedience gave entrance to the curse; but
you, Virgin Mother of God, by the offshoot of your child-bearing made
blessing flower for the world; therefore we all magnify you.\]

Troparia.

Your tomb ever works healings, Venerable One, welling up sweet-scented
myrrh for those who come to it with faith, O Nicholas, burying the
onslaught of diseases; therefore we all call you blessed.

Like the sun, Nicholas, you light the whole earth with the beacon-fires
of your godlike wonders, dispelling by your sacred mediations the
darkness of dire circumstances, O splendour of High Priests.

As is your wont, O Nicholas, take pity on us who at every moment are
dreadfully storm-tossed by the circumstances of life, the deceits of
demons and the assaults of evil people, that we may call you blessed.

Remember, O my soul, the dread day and hour when the Master is going to
bring you to judgement and to judge your hidden deeds, and cry to him:
Save me, O Saviour, at Nicholas’ entreaties.

Theotokion.

Joyfully we bring you Gabriel’s greeting, and we cry: Hail Paradise, who
ever keep in your midst the tree of life: all-glorious palace of the
Word, hail all-spotless Virgin\!

Aposticha of Lauds. Of the Apostles.

You enlightened the choir of the Apostles by the Holy Spirit, O Christ;
through them wash away the stain of our sin, O God, and have mercy on
us.

Your Holy Spirit, Christ God, declared the unlettered Disciples to be
teachers, and by the many-voiced harmony of the tongues he destroyed
error as all-powerful.

Of the Martyrs.

Precious is the death of your Saints, O Lord; for crushed by sword and
fire and cold, they poured out their blood, having hope in you of
receiving the reward of their toil: they endured and received from you,
O Saviour, your great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

O Virgin, alone pure and undefiled, who ineffably bore God, intercede
that  our souls may be saved.

 

## AT THE LITURGY

The Beatitudes.

Through a tree Adam became an exile from Paradise; but through the Tree
of the Cross the Thief made Paradise his home. For the one through
tasting set aside his Master’s commandment, while the other, crucified
with him, confessed the hidden God, as he cried: Remember me in your
Kingdom.

As spiritual sheep of the Shepherd and Lamb you were sent by him as wise
lambs into the midst of wolves, by your preaching changing their
savagery to the tameness of the Faith, as you cried with unswerving
faith: Remember us also, Saviour, in your Kingdom.

Passing through all the regions of the world like shining stars,
Disciples of the Lord, you dispelled the darkness of error and shed the
light of salvation on those who had erred: therefore, Heralds of Christ,
we call you blessed, beseeching you to intercede always for us with the
Lord.

Of the Martyrs.

Blessed, wise Martyrs, slain and burned by material fire, you burned up
the material of bitter polytheism; and now you pour forth streams of
healing for us who have recourse to you in faith, as we fervently shout
and cry: Remember us also, Saviour, in your Kingdom.

Glory.

Gazing steadfastly and soberly with the mind’s thought, let us say to
the One who is seated in the highest with the Father together with the
Spirit: Undivided Trinity, who of old established the universe by the
word, and now enlighten all those who in faith cry to you with
undoubting voice: Remember us also in your Kingdom.

Both now. Theotokion*.*

All-spotless Maiden, Mother of God, you are truly called Joy of Apostles
and Unfading Crown of Champions; with them, Sovereign Lady, ask
redemption from faults and amendment of life for us who ask you with
faith and cry to you: Hail, most truly the Treasury of blessings.

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

