\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins.md) \] \[ Thursday Matins \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers.md) \]

ON THURSDAY MORNING
===================

****

AT MATINS

****

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter Kathismata of the Apostles.

Tone 1

*.*

Wise Fishermen of the whole world, as you have received GodÂ’s
compassion, now intercede also for us who cry: Lord, save your people
and your city, and through your Apostles free the souls of us who are
held fast by troubles.

****

Verse:

** Their sound has gone out into all the earth; and their words to the
end of the world. ****

When the stone had been sealed.

With the net of the word the Fishermen ruined the webs of the
rhetoricians by the rod of the Cross and enlightened the nations
devoutly to glorify the true God; and therefore we cry to you who gave
them power: Glory to the Father and the Son, glory to the consubstantial
Spirit, glory to the One who through them enlightened the world.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Theotokion.**

Unburned you conceived the fire of the Godhead, and without seed you
bore the Lord, source of life, O Mother of God full of grace; save those
who magnify you.

****

After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter Kathismata of the Apostles.

The soldiers watching.

Let us the faithful honour with hymns the tuneful trumpets of Christ,
the horses who troubled the sea of godlessness and drew mankind as from
the deep to the inspired harbour of salvation by the grace of the
Spirit.

****

Verse:

** The heavens confess your wonders, Lord; and your truth in the Church
of the Saints. ****

Same melody.

The Light which outside time shone from Light, in time appeared in flesh
to those on earth, and through you, All-blest Apostles, enlightened the
world; therefore we all, enlightened by your divine teachings, honour
your sacred memory.

****

Verse:

** God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel. ****

Of the Martyrs. Same melody.

Let us all beseech ChristÂ’s Martyrs, for they ask for our salvation;
and let us in love approach them with faith; they possess the grace of
healing; they ward off the regiments of demons, as guardians of the
Faith.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.\
Same melody.**

The godly Disciples and Apostles by their inspired teachings proclaimed
your ineffable birth-giving, O Maiden, immaculate Mother of God,
teaching that you should be fittingly worshipped; but we beg you: with
them ask that those who honour you in faith may be saved.

****

Canon of the Holy Apostles.\
Ode 1. Irmos.

Your triumphant right hand, in a manner fitting God, has been glorified
in strength, O Immortal; for in its infinite strength it broke in pieces
the enemy, and made a strange new way for the Israelites in the deep.

****

Troparia.

Enlightened by the divine beams of the radiance with triple sun,
glorious, godlike Apostles, you were truly gods; therefore, as is
fitting, with faith we honour you.

When, through compassion, the Word appeared on earth in the solidity of
flesh, having become by faith his best ministers and fulfillers of his
commands, O Apostles, you are ever honoured.

Revered Apostles, with the shining rays of light of the all-holy Spirit
enlighten me, wholly covered by the darkness of sins, and guide me
clearly to the way of repentance.

****

Theotokion.

Harmony of the Apostles, all-blameless Lady who gave birth to God, as
you are Mother of him who spoke in them in a manner fitting God, with
them intercede that I may be delivered from the fire of Gehenna.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

You alone know the weakness of mortals and in compassion took its form;
gird me with power from on high, to cry to you: Holy the living temple
of your ineffable glory, O lover of mankind!

****

Troparia.

God. alone invisible, was seen in a body and chose you as his Disciples,
all-blessed, glorious Apostles, who to the whole world proclaim his name
and his glory beyond worlds.

To you alone I have sinned, O Christ, against you alone I have offended
and wickedly defiled my soul; in your mercy cleanse me, save me, O Jesu,
alone easily entreated, who have your wise Apostles interceding for me.

As you are compassionate, deliver me, all-praised Apostles, from the
bitterness of passions, thoughts and every sin, making my understanding
sweet by repentance, for you carry in your hearts the divine sweetness.

****

Theotokion.

With the immaterial Ministers, with all the Powers on high, with Martyrs
and Apostles of Christ, to whom you gave a body from your pure blood,
Virgin, did not know wedlock, implore that your servants may be saved.

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

Avvakoum with foreseeing eyes perceived you as a mountain overshadowed
by the grace of God, from which, he foretold, the Holy one of Israel
would come, for our salvation and refashioning.

Troubling the seas of godless unbelief by your assaults, glorious
Apostles, Horses of Christ chosen by God, you drowned the spiritual
enemy and drew to salvation those who had been drowned.

Vessels of the divine splendours of the Spirit, with the enlightenment
of repentance make radiant my soul, darkened and home to passions of
many kinds, godlike Apostles, blessed by God.

Clouds that rain down the water of life, water my soul, dried up by the
drought of the passions and make it sprout with the saving ear of
virtues, glorious Apostles.

****

Theotokion.

Prophets, Apostles, glorious Martyrs, with the Mother of the Redeemer,
entreat insistently that we may be redeemed from sins and eternal
punishment, from temptations, dangers and afflictions.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

O Christ, who enlightened the ends of the world by the brightness of
your coming, and made them radiant by your Cross, enlighten with the
light of your divine knowledge the hearts of those who sing your praise
with right belief.

****

Troparia.

All-honoured Apostles, you have been revealed as mountains dropping down
sweetness and fairest joy, destroying all the bitterness of the devil
and making the faithful glad.

You recognised Christ who came as a stranger to his own, and joined
yourselves truly to him. And so rescue me from the harm of the Stranger,
godly Apostles of the Word.

Heal the secret wounds of my soul at the holy intercessions of those who
proclaimed in the world your divine coming, O Compassionate, your
sufferings and your Resurrection from the tomb.

****

Theotokion.

With all the Bodiless ones, Virgin Mother of God, implore God the Word
to free your servants from irrational deeds and pleasures that bring
death.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

The deepest abyss has surrounded us, there is none to deliver, we have
been counted as sheep for the slaughter; save your people, O God, for
you are the strength and restoration of the weak.

****

Troparia.

You caught the nations in spiritual nets to know the One who was made
known for the refashioning of mortals, O Apostles blessed by God.

My wretched soul, my miserable soul, my unrepentant soul, repent and cry
out to Christ: I have sinned, be merciful, O Lover of mankind, at the
prayers of the Apostles, for you are supremely good.

All-powerful Christ, who Israel of old drew waters from a rock for
Israel, dissolving my hardness, make me carry channels of tears at the
prayers of the Apostles, for are most merciful.

****

Theotokion.

O Virgin, entreat as Fashioner and God the One who through
loving-kindness was well pleased to be born from you, to save from
temptations and disasters those who ever hope in you.

****

Ode 7. Irmos.

We the faithful recognise you, O Mother of God, as a spiritual furnace;
for as he, the highly exalted, saved the three Youths, so he wholly
refashioned me, humanity, in your womb, the God of our Fathers. praised
and glorified above all.

****

Troparia.

Jesus the Lord, being source of life, sent out like rivers the Disciples
watering with streams of the knowledge of God all that lies beneath the
sun, and singing: God of the Fathers, praised and highly exalted.

Carrying in their hearts a spiritual fire, the divine grace of Christ, O
Disciples, you burnt up the matter of godlessness. Therefore consume my
material passions, God of the Fathers, praised and highly exalted.

Deliver me from the punishment of the fire, O God, at the entreaties of
your Disciples, and do not cast me away from your presence, who cry out
to in repentance: God of the Fathers, praised and highly exalted.

****

Theotokion.

Draw me out from corrupting sins and passions, you who were born without
corruption from the Mother of God, granting incorruption to those who
sing: O God of the Fathers, praised and highly exalted.

****

Ode 8. Irmos.

In the furnace as in a smelter the Israelite Youths shone with the
beauty of godliness brighter than gold as they said: All you works of
the Lord, bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Troparia.

The great Sun unfurled you as his beams into the whole inhabited world,
O Apostles, shedding light on believers who cry out: All you works of
the Lord, bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

As spiritual shepherds, as lambs of the Shepherd, as sheep of the Lamb
and God our Redeemer, O Apostles who saw God, intercede without ceasing
that I may be delivered from the spiritual wolf and from the bitter
portion of the goats.

Most miserable soul, groan and cry out to the Lord: I sinned above all
others, and I have been utterly lawless. Cleanse me, save me, like the
Harlot, like the Publican, like the Thief, O Compassionate, at the
acceptable intercessions of the Apostles.

****

Theotokion.

Mother of God, with Angels and with Apostles, Martyrs and prophets,
implore Christ to save those who cry: All you works of the Lord, bless
the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages.

****

Ode 9. Irmos.

The burning bush that was not consumed was a type of your child-bearing;
quench for us now the raging furnace of temptations we pray, O Mother of
God, that we may unceasingly magnify you.

****

Troparia.

Revealed as godlike and light-giving lamps of the holy Spirit, Blessed
Apostles, you enlightened the whole inhabited world with the
light-giving rays of your revered and all-wise preaching, so diminishing
the darkness of idols.

Being godly branches of the spiritual vine, glorious Apostles, you
sprouted with godly grape clusters which pour out the wine of salvation.
And so rescue me from the drunkenness of pleasures.

Wretch that I am, I tremble when I consider that fearful judgement seat
of yours, O Christ, for now I am beset with shameful and filthy deeds,
and before sentence I am condemned. And so, at the prayers of your
Apostles, take pity on me.

****

Theotokion.

You alone made mortals divine by bearing the Word incarnate. Implore him
with the Apostles and Martyrs, all-holy Virgin, Bride of God, for all of
us who with faith call you blessed and who honour you.

****

Aposticha of the Apostles.

The harmonious lyre of the Apostles, struck by the Holy Spirit, has
abolished the rites of the loathsome demons, and by proclaiming the one
Lord has freed the nations from the error of idols and taught them to
worship the consubstantial Trinity.

****

Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Let us together sing the praises of Peter and Paul, Luke, Matthew, Mark,
John, Andrew, Thomas, Bartholomew, Simon the Canaanite, James, Philip;
and let us fittingly praise the whole assembly of the Disciples.

****

Of the Martyrs

Be glad in the Lord, you Martyrs, because you have fought the good
fight; you have stood against Kings and defeated tyrants; you were not
frightened by fire and sword; when wild beasts were devouring your
bodies you raised a hymn with the Angels to Christ and received the
crowns from heaven, asking that peace be given to the world and his
great mercy.

Glory. Both now*.*

**Theotokion.**

Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Like the Prophets let us hymn the Virgin as golden jar of the manna,
bush unburned, table and throne, golden lampstand that holds the lamp,
unhewn mountain, ark of sanctification and gate of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
