\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone3.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat3ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun3nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun3mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins2.md) \] \[ Thursday Matins \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers2.md) \]

**ON THURSDAY MORNING**

AT MATINS
---------

****

After the 1st Reading of the Psalter Kathismata of the Apostles.

Tone 3. Awed by the beauty.

As All-powerful you have made the memory of your Apostles radiantly
bright, Lord, for you gave them strength to imitate your sufferings;
bravely they conquered the power of Beliar; therefore they have received
gifts of healings. At their supplications, O Merciful, grant peace to

your people. ****

Verse:

Their sound has gone out into all the earth; and their words to the end
of the world.

The Apostles of God the Word watered the earth with streams, and the ear
of grain of the Faith sprouted and filled the ends of the earth, for
they cut down all the cockle; therefore they brought all to Christ God,
baptising them into the uncreated Trinity.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.\
Awed by the beauty.**

As I called to mind the measureless wealth of your sympathy and the
invincible might of your power, beset by trouble and in dread despair, I
ran to your protection; crying with tears from the depths of my heart, I
cry to you Virgin Mother of God, Â‘Save me, save the unworthy!Â’

****

After the 2nd reading others.

Come, let us all praise the Apostles with godly songs, for by drowning
the error of idols they led mortals to divine light and taught them to
believe in the Trinity; therefore as to-day we devoutly honour them, let
us glorify Christ our God.

****

Verse:

The heavens confess your wonders, Lord; and your truth in the Church of
the Saints. ****

Same melody.

The far-famed and god-bearing Apostles, shining with deeds of right
belief, quenched the error of false belief; enriching the world with
true religion they radiantly adorned the Churches as they ask Christ God
to grant peace to the faithful and his great mercy.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

Drowning in a sea of passions I flee to the ocean of your pities, Mother
of God, help me; stretch out your right hand to me your servant,
All-Immaculate, save me as once your Son saved Peter; have mercy on a
soul foundering in the billows of many offences.

****

After the 3rd Reading other.

In praise we hymn you, Nicholas, as herald of the truth and radiant
beacon of the world, and as we ask in faith we cry out, Â‘As you
snatched the innocent from death, so rescue us, O Holy one, from
dangers, affliction and every dread trouble.

****

Verse:

God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel. ****

Of the Martyrs.

Holy, all-praised Champions, through the faith you shone out as radiant
beacons, physicians of the weak; for you were not cowed by the torments
of tyrants but cast down the blasphemies of idols, having as an
invincible trophy the Cross of the truth.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

All-Immaculate Mother of God, you have been revealed as the all golden
throne of the King and Paradise that flowers again; for you carried God
in your womb and make us fragrant with divine graces; therefore we all
ever proclaim you as truly Mother of God and we magnify you.

****

Canon of the Apostles.

Ode 1. Tone 3. Irmos.

He who of old assembled the waters into one gathering by his divine
decree, and divided the sea for the people of Israel, he is our God and
he has been glorified. To him alone let us sing, for he has been
glorified.

****

Troparia.

Come let us bless the ChurchÂ’s towers, devoutly built on the foundation
of the faith and who establish all believers, the sacred Apostles, that
by their supplications we may be saved.

Unshakeable pillars of true religion, I have been toppled by the error
of the foe, I lie on the ground, I am in danger, I am at a loss. Set me
upright that I may find forgiveness of the things by which I have
offended.

Fearful before the sentence, O Just Judge, I, a prodigal, condemn
myself, for I have amassed unnumbered evil works; therefore I implore
you, save me in my despair, at the godly entreaties of your Apostles.

****

Theotokion.

With holy Prophets, with Apostles, with Martyrs, insistently implore the
Lord who was incarnate from you, Pure Virgin, to slay all the passions
of our flesh and to bestow on us eternal life.

****

Another Canon, of St Nicholas, of which the acrostic is:

I offer my third prayer to Nicholas. Joseph.

Let us honour and with love call blessed, Nicholas, the shining lamp and
unsleeping torch upon earth, who ever embarks towards godly havens those
storm-tossed by the waves of life.

Empowered by GodÂ’s strength, O All-blessed, you obtained zeal in
accordance with the knowledge of true religion; therefore you rescued
those about to die unjustly; and so we implore you, deliver us from
every wickedness of the unjust foe.

Bring, Father, to the Lord a plea that never ceases, that he may deliver
us from sins, from the flame of everlasting punishment, from temptations
and troubles, as he alone is supremely good.

****

Theotokion.

Let us now in harmony call Mary, the all-immaculate, blessed, the divine
Ark who contained the Giver of the law, who takes away all our
iniquities through his divine compassion, the unfathomable sea.

****

Ode 3. Irmos.

Almighty, Most High, who bring all things out of nothing, created by the
Word, perfected by the Spirit, establish me in your love.

****

Troparia.

You filled all the corners of the world with your inspired teaching;
fill my soul with right actions and good thoughts, eye-witnesses of
Christ.

From ten thousand stumbling blocks of the evil one, from every trouble,
every compulsion, from distress, rescue me, Disciples of Christ.

Alas, my wretched and lowly soul, continually sinning and angering God,
how can you ask for pardon, for you never make a break from wickedness?

**Theotokion.**

Divine ladder, which Jacob saw, by which God came down and exalted us,
with the Apostles insistently implore that he take pity on us.

****

Of the Saint.

You appeared as a sharpened sword of the Spirit, cutting off the evil
tares of heretics, and smoothing a path of salvation for the faithful,
wise father Nicholas.

O Saint, we entreat you as a source pouring forth springs of healings,
dispel by your prayers the miry passions of us all, rescuing us from
dangers and troubles.

By your valiant toils you cast down the foe; now too, by your holy
prayers, Father Nicholas, strengthen against him our thoughts, grown
weak with the floods of passions.

****

Theotokion.

Mind cannot conceive the Offspring beyond mind of your wondrous
child-bearing. Virgin Mother, who gave birth to God; and so I implore
you give my mind the grace to glorify you always.

****

Ode 4. Irmos.

You displayed mighty love for us, O Lord; for you gave up your
Only-begotten Son to death for our sake; therefore with thanksgiving we
cry to you, Â‘Glory to your power, O Lord!Â’

****

Troparia.

Unsetting Sun, unfurling your Apostles like beams, like rays, you
brought light to all the corners of the world, O Word, and you dispelled
the gloom of ignorance.

A sea of dreadful sin rages round me, O Word, waves of disordered
thoughts trouble my lowly soul. O Lord and Helmsman, save me at the
supplications of your Disciples.

I quake with fear when I think on your fearful coming, Master; for
before sentence I have within me my conscience to accuse me, and to
torment my insensitivity before the torment.

****

Theotokion.

Word of God, born from a Maiden, Child of God, at her holy mediation and
those of your wise Apostles, rescue your servants from every distress,
every constraint.

****

Of the Saint.

Every believer advances you each day, Nicholas, as a mediator with God;
and so we implore you, Father, rescue us from harsh distress and from
falling into sins.

You have the grace of the Lord as a living stream in your heart, O wise,
all-blessed Father, and you unceasingly bedew those who are miserably
endangered by the heat of troubles and the wasteland of sins.

Of old, All-blessed, you delivered one who was being led to an
undeserved death, so now too save us from the persecution of destructive
men and from every deception of the demons.

****

Theotokion.

Ineffably you bore the Word, incarnate through the abundance of his
compassion. Beseech him, O Immaculate, to rescue us all from carnal
defilements and all the troubles of life.

****

Ode 5. Irmos.

The Unseen, you appeared on earth, and the Incomprehensible you
willingly lived among mortals; and so we rise to you at dawn and sing
your praise you, O Lover of mankind.

****

Troparia.

Incarnate upon earth, you fashioned your Disciples into heavens which
proclaimed your glory, O Christ; therefore through them, Lord, have
mercy on our souls.

From passions, from every constraint, from dire distress deliver your
servants, O Word, at the acceptable entreaties of your Apostles.

Alas, my wretched soul, how are you, who remain fruitless, going to
stand before the fearful Judge? Hasten, repent by sprouting fruits of
virtues.

****

Theotokion.

Pure Virgin, implore him who appeared ineffably on earth in flesh from
your pure blood, as he remains ever your Son, to bestow pardon on us.

****

Of the Saint.

Standing in the pure light and on fire with the rays that ever flood
from it, Father, ask enlightenment and peace for all.

O supremely good, at the fervent prayers of Nicholas take pity on me who
with my unfeeling mind have always angered you more than all mortals.

I have squandered my life in sloth and so I beseech you, Father
Nicholas, rouse my soiled thought to repentance.

****

Theotokion.

As only joy of the Angels, O Full of GodÂ’s grace, fill with joy my
sullen mind, sunk deep in indifference.

****

Ode 6. Irmos.

The final abyss of sins has surrounded me and my spirit fails; but,
Master, stretch out your upraised arm and save me like Peter, O
Helmsman.

****

Troparia.

The company of the Apostles having drawn from the source an abyss of
spiritual wisdom, dried up all the streams of this worldÂ’s wisdom and
watered all the assemblies of the devout.

Groan and weep, my lowly soul, and cry out to the Lord, saying, Â‘I have
sinned against you, compassionate Master, be merciful to me at the
supplications of your ApostlesÂ’.

Flowing torrents of passions have brought about the fall of the house of
my heart. O Apostles, the rivers of the Spirit, I have been crushed;
refashion me into life.

****

Theotokion.

The band of the Apostles, with her who bore you, entreats you, O Christ,
Â‘Send down pardon and peace to your servants, as you are God who love
mankind and long to be reconciled.

****

Of the Saint.

Having slain your members by self-mastery you gained the life which does
not age; make us sharers in it too, wise Father, by your prayers, by
flight from the work of evil.

With the sail of your sacred prayers deliver us from sea of many dangers
and the deep of sin, embarking us for the roadstead of life, wise
Hierarch.

Adorning the throne of Myra, you were revealed as an ornament of High
Priests; but by your prayers save us from the worldÂ’s temptations,
blameless Hierarch.

****

Theotokion.

The Word by dwelling in your womb, pure Mother, through his
compassionate mercy drove into exile the corruption that through
transgression had of old made its dwelling among men.

****

Ode 7. The Irmos.

The three Youths of old did not worship the golden image, object of
Persian reverence, as they sang in the midst of the furnace, Â‘God of
our Fathers, blessed are you!Â’

****

Troparia.

Christ, the light of the world, revealed you, light-bearing Apostles, to
be a light that ends the darkness of deception and enlightens the minds
of believers.

Smash the snares which the malignant one has set for us, light-bearing
Apostles, and level out for us, who have recourse to you, paths of
repentance.

Inspired Apostles of the Lord, you are divine salt; purify my soul,
which through passions of the flesh has lost its savour, and bring
believers back to life.

****

Theotokion.

Beauty of Jacob, make my soul radiant with forms of beauty, I beg, as
with the Apostles you now entreat the One who was born from your pure
blood.

****

Of the Saint.

When Arius the madman was once ravaging the LordÂ’s people, you
throttled him

with the cords of your words as a true chief shepherd, Father Nicholas.

In holiness you reached the end of your life and you dwell with the
Apostles, Father Nicholas, and you send hallowing and enlightenment to
those who devoutly call you blessed.

We ever call upon you, Father Nicholas, as a ready deliverer, as fervent
helper, to deliver us from the passions and from unexpected temptations
which assail us.

****

Theotokion.

Pure Virgin, lead me to the light, who am darkened in soul by
indifference, kindling again the lamp of my heart with good zeal, that I
may glorify you.

****

Ode 8. The Irmos.

In the unbearable fire, but unharmed by the flames, the Youths, famed
for their reverence for God, were as one as they sang the divine hymn,
Â‘All you works of the Lord bless the Lord, and highly exalt him
throughout all the ages.Â’

****

Troparia.

I have been cut by the sword of passions and I have been wounded in
heart by the madness of the creator of wickedness; glorious Apostles,
heal me who am wholly without resource, for you are physicians of souls
and bodies.

The divine sound of the Heralds has been poured out into all the earth,
wonderfully teaching it to reverence one being, one nature, truly one
lordship, one kingship of the Trinity to all the ages.

I have fallen many times and have squandered your long-suffering by my
ever-present folly; turn me back, Master, Word, who know my great
weakness, my sloth and my foolishness.

****

Theotokion.

All-holy Mother of God, divine tongs, which ineffably held the divine
coal, quench the burning coals of my passions with the dew of your
consolations and of the all-glorious and divine Apostles.

****

Of the Saint.

Venerable Father, by becoming meek you have inherited the land of the
meek; and so with faith I beg you, by your prayers calm the storms of
the evil one that incessantly rise against me.

As you rescued the generals who were about to die unjustly, so rescue us
from the wickedness of evil men and from every assault of the demons,
Nicholas, as you implore the Saviour.

You showed mankind a even and saving road, guide us in it as we journey
on the road of life, thrice-blessed Nicholas, that together we may enter
the city of life.

****

Theotokion.

Strength and song is he who was born of you, All-blameless Virgin;
beseech him insistently, to give me, who am paralysed by the passions,
strength to fulfil his saving commands.

****

Ode 9. The Irmos.

In the shadow and letter of the Law, Let us the faithful discern a
figure. Â‘Every male child that opens the womb shall be holy to God.Â’
Therefore the Son and Word of the Father who has no beginning, the
firstborn child of a Mother who had not known man, we magnify.

****

Troparia.

The word of your Disciples has established the ends of the earth, O Word
of the Father without beginning; at their supplications take pity on me
who have slipped irrationally towards the passions and been gripped by
the deception of the demons.

My soul, enslaved to assaults of passions, bring supplications to him
who suffered the Passion for your sake, that he may deliver you from
passions; as his sacred Disciples, who imitated the sufferings of his
passion in the flesh, openly intercede.

Disciples of Christ, when you sit with him to judge those who are
subject to judgement, establish my soul, befouled by unnatural works,
uncondemned, for you are my good protectors, helpers of the world.

****

Theotokion.

Chaste Virgin, pure palace of Christ, Virgin all-holy of holies, who
bore the Holy God beyond explanation and reason, with the holy Apostles
intercede on behalf of all.

****

Of the Saint.

The whole round world has found in you a divine stronghold and fortress
and fair refuge, who by your mediations ever rescue it from every
pressure of temptations, Father Nicholas; and so in praise it faithfully
calls you blessed.

Hemmed in by many disasters, I flee, All-blessed, to the wide plain of
your prayer. Â‘Transform the toil of my soul, I cry, calm the waves of
despair and bring peace to my troubled mindÂ’.

The coming of the Creator is at hand to judge the whole earth, and I,
accursed, am not prepared; I shudder when I consider the multitude of my
offences; take pity on me, long-suffering Lord, and save me at the godly
prayers of your holy Nicholas.

****

Theotokion.

Appear to me as a saving enlightenment, you who bore the light,
dispelling the many and dread clouds from my soul, that by your prayers
I may become a son of the day, doing holy deeds, and that in hymns I may
ever call you blessed.

**Aposticha of Lauds, of the Apostles.**

Your sound has gone out into all the earth, holy Apostles; you abolished
the error of idols by preaching the knowledge of God; this is your good
fight, blessed Saints, and so we praise and glorify your memories.

**Verse 1. We were filled in the morning with your mercy, O Lord, and we
rejoiced and were glad. In all our days, let us be glad, for all the
days you have afflicted us, for the years we have suffered adversity.
Look upon your servants and your works, and guide their sons.**

Blamelessly keeping ChristÂ’s commands, holy Apostles, freely you
received, freely you give, curing the passions of our souls and bodies;
and so as you have boldness, implore him to have mercy on our souls.

****

Of the Martyrs.

The powers of the holy Angels marvelled at the contests of the Martyrs;
for clothed in a mortal body they despised tortures and became imitators
of the passion of our Saviour, and they intercede for our souls.

****

Verse 2.

And may the brightness of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper the work
of our hands, O prosper the work of our hands.

Glory. Both now.

**Theotokion.**

O Lady, honoured first of saints, praise of the heavenly Orders, hymn of
the Apostles, summary of the Prophets, accept too our supplications.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to\
Archimandrite Ephrem Â©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**
