\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins.md) \]
\[ Tuesday Matins \] \[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers.md) \]

# ON TUESDAY MORNING

## AT MATINS

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata.

Kathismata of Compunction. Tone 1.

Conceived in iniquities,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) I, the wastrel, dare not raise
my gaze to the height of heaven,[\[2\]](#_ftn2) but confident in your
love for humankind I cry: O God be merciful to me and save me.

Verse: Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your
wrath.

If the just can scarcely be saved,[\[3\]](#_ftn3) how shall I the sinner
appear? I have not borne the burden and heat of the day; number me with
those of the eleventh hour, O God, and save me.[\[4\]](#_ftn4)

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Come, believers, having gained Mary the Mother of God as an unbreachable
wall, let us fall down before her, for she has freedom to speak with the
One who was born from her, to intercede and to save our souls from wrath
and death.

After the 2nd reading other Kathismata.  
The soldiers watching.

Hasten to open to me your fatherly embrace; like the Wastrel I have
squandered my whole life, turning from your pity, O Saviour, to wealth
which cannot be spent; do not now despise my beggared heart; for to you,
Lord, with compunction I cry, ‘I have sinned against you, save
me\!’[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

Verse:* *Lord, do not rebuke me in your anger; nor chastise me in your
wrath.

The judgment seat is fearful and the judgment just; my deeds are
dreadful, but, O Merciful, speedily save me and rescue me from
punishment; deliver me, Master, from the portion of the goats, to stand
me on your right hand, Judge most just.[\[6\]](#_ftn6)

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.  
Same melody.

Put away, my soul, the sleep of sloth and light the bright lamp of
repentance, and now go out, bidding farewell to the confusion of life,
to meet the immortal Bridegroom, saying, ‘Accept and do not reject me, O
Word, at the supplications of the one who gave you
birth’.[\[7\]](#_ftn7)

After the 3rd Reading, Other Kathismata.  
The soldiers watching.

John, who of old baptized in Jordan’s streams the Purification of all
the world, draw me out, who am drowned by many offences, and wash me
clean of every kind of stain, as you ever entreat the Lover of humankind
as an acceptable intercessor.

Verse: God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

Of the Martyrs.  
When the stone had been sealed.

As good soldiers, believing with one accord, not trembling before the
threats of tyrants, you fervently drew near to Christ, O Saints, having
taken up the precious Cross, and having finished your
course,[\[8\]](#_ftn8) you received victory from heaven. Glory to him
who gave you strength; glory to him who crowned you; glory to him who
through you grants healings to all.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.  
The soldiers watching.

John, leaping in his mother’s womb, by grace recognised God being
carried in your womb, pure Virgin, and faithfully
worshipped.[\[9\]](#_ftn9) But I implore you, O Virgin, with the
Forerunner, entreat the Word, to whom you gave a body, that your servant
may be saved.

Canon of Compunction, of which the Acrostic, without the Theotokia, is:

O Word, receive these words of mine. Joseph.[\[10\]](#_ftn10)

Ode 1. Tone 1. Irmos.

Let us all sing[\[11\]](#_ftn11) a song of victory to God, who has done
amazing wonders with uplifted arm[\[12\]](#_ftn12), and saved Israel,
for he has been glorified[\[13\]](#_ftn13).

Troparia.

D Enslaved to the passions of sin, I fall before you, Lord, that you may
declare me free of them, as I glorify your goodness.

E Wretch that I am, I have been wounded by the sword of sin and died.
And seeing me lying there the enemy rejoices. O Lord, who raise the
dead, give me life and save me.

Of the Martyrs

Χ The choirs of Champions have been glorified, for with their limbs they
glorified Christ, who put on flesh and through suffering made corruption
vanish.

Ο Towers and champions of the Church, the glorious Martyrs endured
unshaken by the assaults of the foe. At their intercessions, O God, give
life to us all.

Theotokion

As a throne formed of fire[\[14\]](#_ftn14) you bear the Creator; as a
living bridal chamber and palace of delight, you hold the King, who
became what we are, without change and confusion[\[15\]](#_ftn15).

Another Canon, to the honoured Forerunner,  
of which the Acrostic is:  
Listen to the voice of those who cry to you, blest Saint.
Joseph[\[16\]](#_ftn16).

The same Irmos.

F You were called ‘Voice of the Word’[\[17\]](#_ftn17), blest Saint.
Therefore, O Forerunner, receive our voices that we bring to you,
freeing us from evils by your mediation.

W Shining out like the dawn, like the sun, you enlighten the ends of the
earth and darken the wicked spirits. Therefore dispel the gloom darkness
of my soul.

N To the dead, blest Forerunner, you preached the coming of our
life[\[18\]](#_ftn18). Therefore put to death the passions that slay me,
and show me to be a partaker of divine radiance.

Theotokion.

H All-holy Lady, who alone gave birth in time to the immaculate
incarnate Son, heal all the chronic passions of my wretched soul.

Ode 3. Irmos.

‘A stone which the builders rejected has become the head of the
corner’[\[19\]](#_ftn19); it is the rock on which Christ made
firm[\[20\]](#_ftn20) the Church which he had ransomed[\[21\]](#_ftn21)
from among the nations[\[22\]](#_ftn22).

Troparia

Ι See my weakness, Lord, who wore it. See the dread deformity of my
soul, and listen to my voice, most merciful Christ, and change its
ugliness to beauty of form[\[23\]](#_ftn23).

S O Jesu, save the wastrel[\[24\]](#_ftn24); save me, who have alone
transgressed your saving laws, and irrationally committed every sin and
been made subject to thoughts that alienate from you, good Lord.

Of the Martyrs

T The host of Bodiless Powers was truly amazed at your courage, Holy
Ones, how you wondrously competed in the stadium and falling in body you
threw down in one godly moment all your bodiless opponents.

E Still decked out with the blood from your wounds; still drenched in
gore, O Champions, you stand beside the Lord, the immortal King, all
garlanded with victors’ crowns.

Theotokion

You give birth the One whom the Father begot before all ages; you
nourish the nourisher without knowing man. Wondrous the marvel\! New the
mystery, O Full of grace\! Therefore the souls of all believers magnify
you.

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

S In holiness, O Forerunner, you sprouted from a barren mother without
fruit, and by divine husbandry you appeared bearing fruit. Therefore
make my heart, barren of everything, a source of fair offspring, that I
may ever faithfully glorify you.

A With heavenly bread, blest Saint, make firm my heart, weakened by evil
thoughts, and make me eagerly fulfil the wishes of God, the
all-compassionate, that I may ever faithfully glorify you.

K You preached the Lamb who takes away the sin of the
world[\[25\]](#_ftn25), blessed Prophet, lighten, I beg, the heavy
burden of my sins[\[26\]](#_ftn26), giving me compunction that wipes
away the stain of passions.

Theotokion.

O The Word, coming forth from you, Mother of God, bearing flesh in its
entirety, put on Adam in his entirety. Implore him, Mother of God, to
deliver us from trials and temptations of every kind and from the
everlasting fire[\[27\]](#_ftn27).

Ode 4. Irmos

Foreseeing in Spirit, you proclaimed the incarnation of the Word,
prophet Avvakoum, as you cried, ‘When the years draw near you will be
recognised; when the moment comes you will be revealed’; glory to your
power, O Lord\![\[28\]](#_ftn28)

Troparia

O The wealth you gave me I have squandered wickedly, committing
monstrous deeds and now am naked, clothed[\[29\]](#_ftn29) in the works
of dishonour. And so I cry to you, ‘Make me radiant with robes, goading
me to repentance by divine grace’.[\[30\]](#_ftn30)

Y I became unconscious, and have fallen terribly, and I lie upon the
ground, incurably sick. Raise me, O Christ who raise the fallen, and
establish my heart on the rock of repentance.

Of the Martyrs

S Imitating Christ, who was raised upon a Cross, they were acquainted
with blows, yet the Champions rejoiced, and having dispelled torrents of
atheism with the showers of their blood, they are a source of streams of
healing.

D The godly Athletes sailed undrenched through the fierce and bitter
storm of torments. Steered by saving hope, hearts filled with gladness,
they were brought to anchor at the harbours on high.

Theotokion

The hosts of Angels were amazed when they saw how the One who cannot be
seen was seen in our form from you, Virgin Mother of God. Implore him to
count worthy of salvation all those who faithfully glorify you.

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

Y With bodily nakedness you wove yourself a cloak of salvation, Baptist
of the Lord. Clothe me, stripped bare of every good work, I beg, with a
garment[\[31\]](#_ftn31) of justice and gladness.

S Forerunner, who plunged in the streams of Jordan a torrent of delight,
Jesus the giver of life, rain on me too, who am wasted away by the
drought of pleasures, one drop[\[32\]](#_ftn32) of salvation, that as is
fitting I may glorify you.

O It is not an Angel, not an envoy that saved us, but the Lord
himself[\[33\]](#_ftn33), when he came on earth and whose straight ways
you had prepared[\[34\]](#_ftn34), blest Saint. Implore him now to show
me the path that leads to the Kingdom.

Theotokion.

N You were revealed as sanctified Temple of the God who dwelt in you
beyond understanding, O Virgin. Implore him to cleanse us from the stain
of sins, that we may become known as house and dwelling place of the
Spirit.

Ode 5. Irmos.

Give us your peace, O Son of God, for we know no other God but you; we
name you by name,[\[35\]](#_ftn35) for you are God of the living and the
dead.

Troparia.

E I have been filled with many and grievous offences, longsuffering,
compassionate Master. Have compassion on me, who am condemned, and do
not cast me away from your presence.[\[36\]](#_ftn36)

T You justified the Tax-collector, O Christ, when he sighed and groaned;
therefore I too, imitating him, beat my breast and cry to you, ‘Have
mercy on me, O only compassionate and pitying’.[\[37\]](#_ftn37)

Of the Martyrs

O Your Saints, Lord, appeared like unerring[\[38\]](#_ftn38) beacons,
dispelling the deep night of error and making the whole inhabited world
bright with the torchlight[\[39\]](#_ftn39) of their wonders.

Y Like priceless stones, Master, the Martyrs, yearning for you, the Rock
of life, crushed[\[40\]](#_ftn40) through torments, destroyed the whole
dispensation of error.

Theotokion

You gave birth, All-immaculate, to one of the honoured Trinity with two
wills but one hypostasis. Fervently implore him that we may all be
saved.

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

T Like Elias of old you dwelt in the desert, All-blest Forerunner of
Christ; and so with divine care make better my heart turned by offences
into a desert waste.

W You have become an immoveable pillar and greatest foundation of the
faithful, Forerunner of Christ, make my thought, shaken by the wiles of
the deceiver, immoveable.

N The dead were brought the good news[\[41\]](#_ftn41) that the Light
from Light had shone on earth by your light, blest Saint, and we, who
were in darkness, were enlightened. Therefore on me who have been
terribly blackened.

Theotokion.

B David proclaims you Virgin Queen[\[42\]](#_ftn42), Immaculate Pure
Lady. And so I pray you, make me an heir of the heavenly Kingdom, that I
may call you blessed[\[43\]](#_ftn43).

Ode 6. Irmos

I imitate the Prophet Jonas as I cry, ‘Free my life from corruption,
good Lord, and save me, Saviour of the world, as I cry, ‘Glory to
you\!’[\[44\]](#_ftn44)

Troparia

S The bones of my wretched soul have been crushed, and I am bowed down
by the weight of many pleasures. Help me, O Christ, the only hope of
all.

E Fallen into an ocean of dread deeds and the tempest of the passions, I
cry out, ‘All-powerful Christ, bring me up with your mighty hand, and
save me.’[\[45\]](#_ftn45)

Of the Martyrs

M A myriad multitude of holy Athletes trampled underfoot myriads of
spiritual foes and were united with the myriads of heavenly Minds.

O Having dried up the deep of godlessness, O Athletes, you were filled
with the torrent of delight, and so dry up the
out-pourings[\[46\]](#_ftn46) of my sins.

Theotokion

Revealed as a tabernacle of sanctification[\[47\]](#_ftn47), Mary,
sanctify my wretched soul, befouled by pleasures, and make a partaker in
divine glory.

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

O Baptist, who on earth proclaimed repentance[\[48\]](#_ftn48), show me
ways of repentance that guide me to the light, and deliver me from the
chasms of error.

W As you plunged the abyss[\[49\]](#_ftn49) in the river’s streams, dry
up the abysses of my passions by granting me showers of tears,
Forerunner, herald of Christ.

N Forerunner of the Lord, save me from diseases of the soul, passions of
the flesh, the difficulties of life, and trials and afflictions of every
kind.

Theotokion.

T I earnestly entreat you, the Mother of God and fair among women, do
not despise me, Pure Lady, but take pity and keep me safe from every
harm.

Ode 7. Irmos

The fire did not touch or trouble your youths in the furnace, O Saviour.
Then the three, as from one mouth, hymned and blessed you, saying,
‘Blessed is the God of our fathers’.[\[50\]](#_ftn50)

Troparia

Y Job practised patience and in all the assaults of the evil one
remained unshaken, like a noble tower. Always match him, my soul, and
never tire in troubles.

S I have been worsted by bodily pleasures, and though a rational being,
have become irrational. O Word of God, who saved the harlot by a word,
save me, coward that I am, that I may hymn and bless your
goodness.[\[51\]](#_ftn51)

Of the Martyrs

L Wise Martyrs, redeemed by the blood of the One who suffered in the
flesh for us, with eagerness you chose to shed your own blood for him;
and so you reign with him for ever.

O By the construction of sacred struggles, you appeared as a joyful
palace, wise Martyrs, in which Christ, the only King and Lord, who
translated you to heavenly abodes,[\[52\]](#_ftn52) has taken his
rest.[\[53\]](#_ftn53)

Theotokion

From all eternity Christ chose you for his abode, as holy and pure for
his dwelling, and rising from you like the sun, he gave light to the
whole earth.

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

W Glorious, noble Baptist, who became mediator of the old and new
covenants[\[54\]](#_ftn54), mediate for me who have become old in sins
by entreating Jesus, the one who makes all things new, to make me wholly
new.

N On earth you appeared, Forerunner of Christ and Baptist, prescribing
repentance. By your prayers give us strength to accomplish this, that we
may be rescued from the innumerable evils, with by we are always
offending.

S You travelled the narrow way[\[55\]](#_ftn55), pursuing complete
self-mastery, wise Saint, and have been wholly glorified with the broad
place[\[56\]](#_ftn56) of the brightest visions. By interceding with
Christ grant that we too may enjoy them.

Triadikon.

O We the faithful glorify a consubstantial Trinity, Father without
beginning, Son and right Spirit[\[57\]](#_ftn57), Essence of equal
kingship, single lordship, single rule and life that gives us life.

Ode 8. Irmos

The One before whom Angels and all the Hosts of heaven tremble as
Creator and Lord, now praise you Priests, glorify him Young Men, bless
him you peoples and highly exalt him to all the ages.

Troparia

G The cunning serpent with his wicked counsel rendered me naked of every
kind of virtue.[\[58\]](#_ftn58) But now, my Saviour, who stripped bare
all his wickedness, make me radiant with robes of virtue.

O Judge most just, who come[\[59\]](#_ftn59) to judge the race of
mortals in that fearsome hour, do not banish me, who have been
condemned, to the fire of Gehenna,[\[60\]](#_ftn60) but have compassion
and save me.[\[61\]](#_ftn61)

Of the Martyrs

Y All-honoured Athletes of the Lord, affliction, danger, sword nor fire
parted you in any way from the love of Christ, who because of his
compassion has loved us.

S Locked in bodily combat body with a bodiless opponent, you threw him
down, noble Athletes, and you dance with the Bodiless powers, healing
the passions of our souls and bodies.

Theotokion

Having found you as a lily in the valleys[\[62\]](#_ftn62) of life, the
Planter[\[63\]](#_ftn63) of all things dwelt in you, and now with sweet
perfumes of virtue and honour he makes us fragrant, O Mother of God.

Of the Forerunner. Another Irmos.

The one who saved the Youths who in the furnace sang his praise, and who
changed the thunderous flame to dew, Christ our God, sing and highly
exalt him to all the ages.

Troparia.

M Alone above all those born on earth have I offended, alone have I
become a transgressor of your laws, O Lord. Therefore through the
Forerunner take pity on me and save me.

A By your way of life, Baptist John, you were revealed to be an Angel,
preaching the Angel of great counsel[\[64\]](#_ftn64) to the ends of the
earth. Therefore we sing your praise to all the ages.

K Your head was unjustly cut off, blest Saint, who plunged Christ’s head
in the waters. By your prayers empower us all to trample under foot the
destructive head of the deceiver.

A Show us all, blest Saint, the paths that lead to the divine entrances,
that as we tread them we may become heirs of the divine bridal chamber
by your prayers.

Theotokion.

R Deliver me from foul sin, sin’s flame, punishing
darkness[\[65\]](#_ftn65), and the gnashing of teeth[\[66\]](#_ftn66)
and the worm[\[67\]](#_ftn67), O Virgin, only protection of the human
race.

Ode 9. Irmos

The light-bearing cloud,[\[68\]](#_ftn68) in which the Master of all
things came down from heaven as rain upon a fleece[\[69\]](#_ftn69) and
became incarnate for our sake, the One without beginning becoming man,
let us all magnify as the pure Mother of God.

Troparia

I See, now is the moment of repentance and pure work\! See, now is the
day of light\! Work its works; flee the darkness of the passions; banish
the sleep of wicked sloth, my soul, that you may become a partaker in
divine light.

W Like the Tax-collector I groan, like the Harlot I weep, like the Thief
I cry out, ‘Remember me, O Compassionate’, and like the Wastrel son I
cry, ‘I have sinned\!’. Like the Woman of Canaan I fall before you, ‘O
merciful, do not despise me\!’[\[70\]](#_ftn70)

Of the Martyrs

S You have been revealed as truly healers of sufferings of the body and
afflictions of the soul, for you courageously gave your bodies up to
torments and to violent death, all-praised Martyrs of the Lord; and
therefore you are blessed for ever.

H The courage of the Christ’s wise Champions, blazing out more brightly
than the rays of the sun, by grace abolished the prince of darkness,
dispelled the night of godlessness and enlightened the hearts of
believers.

Theotokion

F Virgin Mother of God, with the bright rays of light of the Word who
dawned from your holy womb and flooded the ends of the earth enlighten
my soul, darkened with the blackness of pleasures, that with faith I may
sing your praise.[\[71\]](#_ftn71)

Of the Forerunner. The same Irmos.

I See the lamp shining for those in the darkness of life, see the sweet
voiced swallow, that announces Christ, the spring, the great Forerunner,
mediator of the old and new covenants; by whose prayers we are always
guarded.

W As the Bridegroom’s friend I now put you forward as ambassador, O
Baptist, and I, who have a multitude of sins, cry out to you, ‘Obtain
the cancellation of my debts, All-blessed, and light the lamp of my
soul, completely extinguished by indifference’.

S With bodiless Angels, with revered Apostles, with holy Champions, and
with Prophets, O Prophet, ever implore God who is supremely good, that
we, who are enriched with you as good protector, may obtain eternal good
things.

H Fair swallow, precious nightingale, all-beauteous dove, desert-loving
turtle-dove, Baptist of the Lord, offshoot of the desert, make my soul,
that has become a desert through unfruitfulness, fertile and productive
of good.

Theotokion.

F Like the Cherubim throne[\[72\]](#_ftn72) you carry the one who
carries all things, you nourish the one who nourishes us. Implore him
without ceasing, pure Virgin, graced by God, that your flock may be
rescued from earthquake, collapse, capture and every constraint.

Exapostilarion. As God you adorned.

Let us all praise John the Forerunner and Baptist of the Saviour, the
Prophet from a Prophet, the nurseling of the desert, the offspring of
Elisabeth.

Theotokion. Same melody.

I have you as intermediary with the God who loves humankind; do not
expose my deeds before the Angels. I beg you, O Virgin, help me
speedily.

Aposticha of Lauds. Of Compunction.

Another world awaits you, soul, and a Judge who is to publish all your
hidden and dread deeds. So do not stay with things here, but in
anticipation cry out to the Judge, ‘O God, be merciful to me and save
me\!’

Do not reject me, held fast by sloth, my Saviour. Rouse my thoughts to
repentance and show me to be a tried worker of your vineyard, granting
the payment of the eleventh hour and your great mercy.[\[73\]](#_ftn73)

Of the Martyrs.

These soldiers of the great King opposed the decrees of tyrants, nobly
despised their torments, and having trampled on every error, and been
fittingly crowned, they ask of the Saviour peace and for our souls his
great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.  
All-praised Martyrs.

Virgin all-praised, Moses with prophetic eyes saw the mystery that is in
you, the bush that though in flames was unburned.[\[74\]](#_ftn74) For
the fire of the Godhead did not burn up your womb, pure Maiden. And so
we ask you, as Mother of our God, to grant peace to the world.

 

-----

\[1\]: Psalm 50:7.

\[2\]: Luke 15:11-24.

\[3\]: Proverbs 11:31, 1 Peter 4:18.

\[4\]: Matthew 20:12.

\[5\]: Luke 15:11-24.

\[6\]: Matthew 25:31-46.

\[7\]: Matthew 25:1-13.

\[8\]: 2 Timothy 4:7.

\[9\]: Luke 1:41-42.

\[10\]: This acrostic has no letters for a second ode. The final letter
of the acrostic is in the Theotokion of the 9th Ode.

\[11\]: Exodus 15:1

\[12\]: Exodus 6:6, Deut. 4:34. The phrase occurs 12 times in the Old
Testament; ten of which refer to the deliverance of Israel at the Red
Sea. In Deut. 4:34 it is linked, as here, to ‘wonders’, in Greek
*terata.*

\[13\]: Exodus 15:1.

\[14\]: The throne of the ‘Ancient of Days’ in Daniel (7:9) is described
as a ‘throne of fire’, but the allusion here is most probably to Ezekiel
1, the divine Chariot, one of the frequently used types of the Mother of
God.. 

\[15\]: These two words are used together by St Sophronios of Jerusalem
with reference to the uniting of the divine and human natures of Christ
in the incarnation.

\[16\]: As he does frequently, Joseph signs his Canon in the ninth Ode.

\[17\]: Cf. John 1:23.

\[18\]: The idea of the Forerunner preaching to these in Hades is based
on the second part of the  so-called *Acts of Pilate*, also known as the
*Gospel of Nicodemus*, which was originally a separate work on the
Descent of Christ into Hell (1 Peter 3:19) and probably dates from the
fifth or sixth century. In this account a great light fills Hades at
midnight, to the joy of the Patriarchs and Prophets. Then John the
Baptist, who is described as ‘an ascetic from the wilderness’, comes
forward and tells them of his ministry and that Jesus himself is about
to enter Hades. 

\[19\]: Psalm 117:22. The sentence is an exact quotation from the
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span>.

\[20\]: Cf. 1 Reigns 2:1. The opening words of the Song of Anna in the
<span style="font-variant:small-caps;">lxx</span> are ‘My heart has been
made firm \[in Greek Êstereõqh\] in the Lord’, and the use of this verb
is frequently the only link between the poetic text and the biblical
one.

\[21\]: Cf. Galatians 3:13, 4:5.

\[22\]: The idea of God’s people being brought out ‘from the nations’ is
found a number of times in Ezekiel as well as in Psalm 105:47. It is not
used in the NT. The phrase is used frequently in the liturgical texts.

\[23\]: There is play in Greek on ‘deformity’ \[Âmorfía\] and ‘beauty of
form’ \[eÛmorfía\].

\[24\]: cf. Luk. 15:13.

\[25\]: John 1:29.

\[26\]: Cf. Ps. 37:5.

\[27\]: Matthew 18:8, 25:41.

\[28\]: Avvakoum 3:2. The last sentence poses a problem. It is a
standard one in both the irmi and troparia of the 4th Ode of many
canons, but it is not part of the scriptural text in either Hebrew or
Greek, nor are there any variants in the Greek manuscripts.

\[29\]: The play on words is difficult to render in English. The word in
Greek also means ‘to be sunk’ or ‘submerged’.

\[30\]: Cf. Luke 15:13, 22.

\[31\]: A word hardly found at all  in classical Greek, but frequent in
the Fathers. It occurs some dozen times in the Old Testament, while in
the New, apart from Luke 12:23,  it is only found in St Matthew’s
Gospel, seven times. He uses it for St john the Baptist’s ‘clothing of
camel’s hair’ and for the ‘wedding garment’ in the parable of the royal
marriage feast.

\[32\]: As Faustus says in Marlowe’s play, one drop, even half  a drop
of Christ’s blood could save him. St Romanos has a similar passage in
the final strophe of his Kontakion on All Martyrs: μικρὸν σταγόνα ἐκ τοῦ
πνεύματος ὥσπερ ὄμβρον κατάπεμψον, δέομαι, ‘A small drop of your spirit
send down like rain, I beg’. A homily on the Pharisee and the Harlot
attributed to St Kohn Chrysostom speaks of δικαιοσύνης σταγόνα τινά, ‘a
drop of justice’. The Greek Ephrem has a number of similar expressions.

\[33\]: Isaias 63:9.

\[34\]: Matt. 3:3 (Isaias 40:3).

\[35\]: Isaias 26:12-13. The text  is from the 5th Biblical canticle.
The following verse refers to the dead, who will ‘not see life; nor will
physicians raise them’.

\[36\]: Psalm 50:13.

\[37\]: Cf. Luke 18:9-14.

\[38\]: The word translated ‘beacons’ only occurs in the Old Testament
at Genesis 1:14, where it refers to the sun and moon, and at Daniel 12:
3, where it is of the heavenly bodies in general as a simile of ‘those
with understanding’. It is the latter passage that the poet has in mind.
The Martyrs are like the ‘fixed stars’, not the wandering planets. Our
Lord, echoing Daniel, compares the just to the sun at Matthew 13:43.
There is a play in Greek on ÂplaneîV, ‘unwandering’, ‘fixed’ and plánh
in the next phrase, meaning ‘wandering’, and hence ‘error’. 

\[39\]: The image changes to that of sacred processions, lighted by
torches.

\[40\]: A difficult troparion. The word literally means ‘rolled’. It is
not common in Greek, and only occurs eleven times in the Old Testament.
Its meaning here is unclear. Only two passages may give a clue. Amos
2:13 in Hebrew speaks of a wagon that is ‘crushed’ under the weight of
the sheaves with which it is loaded. The Greek here has ‘is rolled’.
Zachary 9:16 in Greek, followed by the Slavonic, has the mysterious
sentence, ‘And the Lord will save them in that day, his people like
sheep, because holy stones are rolled upon the ground’.

\[41\]: Cf. the earlier note on Ode 1 of this Canon, 3rd Troparion.

\[42\]: Cf. Ps. 44:10.

\[43\]: Luke 1:48.

\[44\]: Cf. Jonas 2:7.

\[45\]: Cf. Jonas 2:7.

\[46\]: This word, diekcúsiV, is unattested in classical Greek and only
cited in Lampe from Migne’s text of George of Pisidia’s *Hexaemeron*,
where the critical edition reads the more usual word *prócusiV*.

\[47\]: Cf. Psalm 131:8.

\[48\]: Cf. Matt.3:2.

\[49\]: The sense of this troparion is not clear. In the Fathers ‘the
abyss’ usually refers to Hades and is pejorative. The word occurs in the
6th Ode, ‘the final abyss encircled me’(Jonas 3:6).  The verb katadúw
can be either transitive or intransitive, but the intransitive sense,
‘to descend into’, followed by an accusative seems to be limited to
Homer. The 1st Aorist, used here, is commonly used transitively. The
meaning could possibly be that John ‘plunged the Abyss (i.e. Christ) in
the streams’, since the verb is used regularly of Baptism, and in Ode 8
we have exactly the same word in the clause, ‘you plunged Christ’s head
in the waters’. On the other hand, although the word ‘Abyss’ is used
positively of ‘the abyss of God’s wisdom‘, it does not seem to be used
as an image of Christ. 

\[50\]: Cf. Daniel 3:26.

\[51\]: This troparion plays on the word lógoV, ‘word’. In Greek
‘rational’ and ‘irrational’ are logikóV and ÁlogoV and ‘word’ is
lógoV.

\[52\]: Cf. John 14:2.

\[53\]: Cf. Isaias 57:15, ‘\[t\]he Lord Most High, resting in the
holies’. The Greek is probably neuter and means ‘in the holy place’
(cf. Psalm 133:2), but it could also be masculine and mean ‘among the
saints’. The poet here deliberately plays on this ambiguity.

\[54\]: Cf. Matt. 11:11-15.

\[55\]: Cf. Matt. 7:13-14, though in the Gospel it the ‘gate’ that is
‘narrow’, the word used here. The ‘road’ is ‘constricted’.

\[56\]: Cf. Pss. 17:20, 117:5, 118:45.

\[57\]: Ps. 50:12.

\[58\]: Cf. Genesis 3:1-7.

\[59\]: Cf. the Nicene Creed. The poet, like the Creed, uses the present
participle, ‘is coming’, not a future. The Latin uses the future ‘will
come’, and this has influenced most, but not all, English versions of
the Creed.

\[60\]: ‘Gehenna’ occurs in the Bible twelve times, ten of them in St
Matthew, who uses the expression ‘Gehenna of fire’ (5:22, 18:19. James
3:6 also speaks of the tongue being ‘set on fire by Gehenna’), rather
than the one used here.

\[61\]: Cf. Matthew 25:41

\[62\]: Cf. Song of Songs 2:1.

\[63\]: This title for God, which is found in the Fathers and the
liturgical texts, has its origin in Genesis 2:2, where the cognate verb
is used, ‘and the Lord God planted a paradise in Edem’.

\[64\]: Isaias 9:5. The original LXX has only this title, the others
were added later, to bring the Greek into line with the Hebrew. There is
no ‘Angel’ in Hebrew.

\[65\]: Cf. Mat. 8:12.

\[66\]: Mat. 8:12.

\[67\]: Mark 9:48.

\[68\]: Cf. in particular Isaias 19:1.

\[69\]: Cf. Psalm 71:16, Judges 6:37-40.

\[70\]: Cf. Luke 18:9-14, 7:36-50, 23:39-43, 15:11-32, Matthew 15:21-28.
It is interesting to notice that four of these five well known
characters are found only in St Luke’s Gospel.

\[71\]: The allusions to the rising sun in this and the preceding
troparion refer to Luke 1:78-9, the Canticle of Zachary forming the
second part of the 9th biblical Ode.

\[72\]: Cf. Ezekiel 1.

\[73\]: Matthew 20:1-16.

\[74\]: Exodus 3:1-6.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

