\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins1.md) \] \[ Wednesday Matins \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Weekday Vespers](weekday_vespers.md) \]

# ON WEDNESDAY MORNING

## AT MATINS

After the 1st Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of the Cross.  
Tone 1.

Lord, save your people and bless your inheritance, granting to faithful
Christians victory over their enemies, and protecting your commonwealth
by your Cross.[\[1\]](#_ftn1)

Verse: ** Exalt the Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool,
for he is holy.

When you were crucified, O Christ, the tyranny of the foe was abolished
and his power trampled on, for it was not an Angel or a mortal but
yourself, Lord, who saved us[\[2\]](#_ftn2). Glory to you\!

Cross-Theotokion.

We have gained you as our protection, O Immaculate, and by your
intercessions we are freed from dread troubles; by the Cross of your Son
we are guarded at all times and as is fitting we all devoutly magnify
you.

After the 2nd Reading from the Psalter, Kathismata of the Cross.

When the stone had been sealed.

We worship the tree of your Cross, lover of humankind, because you, the
Life of all, were nailed upon it. You opened Paradise to the Thief who
approached you in faith, O Saviour, and he was found worthy of its
delight when he confessed you, ‘Remember me, Lord’.[\[3\]](#_ftn3) Like
him receive us too as we cry, ‘We have all sinned; in your compassion do
not despise us’.

Verse: God is our king from of old; he has worked salvation in the midst
of the earth.

The soldiers watching.

The weapon of the Cross was once revealed in war to the devout King
Constantine through Faith as an invincible trophy against his
foes[\[4\]](#_ftn4). The hostile powers tremble at it; it has become the
salvation of the faithful and the boast of Paul.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion.

‘O strange wonder\! O fearful mystery\!’, cried the Ewe-lamb, the
all-blameless Maiden, as she saw the Lord stretched out upon the Tree.
‘He who bears the whole universe in the hollow of his
hand[\[6\]](#_ftn6), how is he condemned by lawless men and condemned to
a cross\!’

After the 3rd reading, Kathismata.

The soldiers watching.

When you stretched out hands on the Cross, O Compassionate, you gathered
in the nations that had gone far away from you to glorify your great
goodness. But look on your inheritance and by your precious Cross cast
down those who make war on us.

Verse: ** God is wonderful in his Saints, the God of Israel.

Of the Martyrs.

Be entreated by the sufferings, which the Saints endured for you, O
Lord; and heal all our pains, we beg, O Lover of mankind.[\[7\]](#_ftn7)

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion.  
The soldiers watching.

The spotless Ewe-lamb, seeing the Lamb and Shepherd hanging dead upon
the tree, cried out with tears, and lamenting as a mother aid, ‘How
shall I hymn your condescension, my Son,  which is beyond understanding,
and your voluntary sufferings, my God supremely good?’

Canon of the Cross, whose acrostic is:  
I shall be saved by the Cross of the Master who suffered. Joseph.

Ode 1. Tone 1. Irmos.  
To the tune of ‘Christ is born’.[\[8\]](#_ftn8)

Delivered from bitter slavery, Israel crossed the impassable as on dry
land. Seeing the enemy drowning, as to a benefactor he sang a hymn to
God who works wonders with uplifted arm, for he has been
glorified.[\[9\]](#_ftn9)

Troparia

Σ When you were hung upon the Cross, O Christ, you raised up fallen
humankind and smashed all the power of the enemy. Therefore I praise
your suffering in song, O Word who suffered and saved me from passions.

Τ You are Lord of glory,[\[10\]](#_ftn10) who crowned humanity with
thorns of glory, that you, O Planter, might make our
thorn-bearing[\[11\]](#_ftn11) nature fruitful with godly deeds.

Of the Martyrs

Α An all-holy company of Saints competed lawfully, sanctified the whole
creation in the streams of their blood and, in God the Father, abolished
the foul sacrifices offered to demons.

Υ Thick clouds of torments did not conceal your courageous struggles,
all-holy Martyrs. Therefore, glorious Saints, you appeared more
brilliant than the rays of the sun as you blazed with saving radiance.

Cross-Theotokion

Ρ You were wounded with a sword,[\[12\]](#_ftn12) O All-pure, as you saw
the passion of your Son, saw him pierced with the lance[\[13\]](#_ftn13)
and shutting out the sword in Paradise that barred the
way[\[14\]](#_ftn14) and gave no godly entrance to the faithful.

Another Canon to the most holy Mother of God. Its Acrostic is the
Alphabet.

Irmos.

\[Your triumphant right hand, in a manner fitting God, has been
glorified in strength, O Immortal; for in its infinite strength it broke
in pieces the enemy, and made a strange new way for the Israelites in
the deep.\]

Troparia.

A Having found you as a holy precinct[\[15\]](#_ftn15), the most holy
Word dwelt in your womb, O Immaculate, granting sanctification and
enlightenment, and redemption from sins to those who honour
you.[\[16\]](#_ftn16)

B As you gave birth to the grape cluster of life, which is a fount of
saving wine, in compassion make me, darkened by the drunkenness of sin,
sober, and lead me in straight paths.

G Do not despise me, Sovereign Lady, who ever stumble by my own will, am
dragged down by evil thoughts, madly ensnared and easily quite
overmastered by my foes.

Ode 3. Irmos.  
To the tune: To the Son begotten of the Father.

Let no mortal boast in their wisdom or their wealth[\[17\]](#_ftn17),
but in faith of the Lord, crying out with right belief to Christ our God
and ever singing, ‘Establish me, Master, on the rock of your
com­mand­ments.’

Troparia

Ω The lawless dug your hands and feet,[\[18\]](#_ftn18) my Jesus, who of
old ineffably fashioned[\[19\]](#_ftn19) humanity with your palm and
through your passion, Christ God, delivered us all from passions and
decay.

Σ Let the moon and sun stop in their course cried
Jesus,[\[20\]](#_ftn20) foreshadowing the eclipse of the great
lights[\[21\]](#_ftn21) when the Master suffered in the flesh on the
Cross.[\[22\]](#_ftn22) Through him[\[23\]](#_ftn23) the evil
principalities of darkness were exposed to public
contempt.[\[24\]](#_ftn24)

Of the Martyrs

Ε The holy Martyrs eagerly bore sufferings, by being wounded they
wounded the serpent Beliar;[\[25\]](#_ftn25) and so they ever heal the
sufferings of our souls by divine approval.[\[26\]](#_ftn26)

Σ You cast down the pillars and temples of the demons, holy Martyrs; by
endurance and courage you wondrously raised yourselves as temples able
to contain the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.

Cross-Theotokion

Ω At the hour of the Passion, as you looked on the One who is comely in
beauty[\[27\]](#_ftn27) without form or beauty[\[28\]](#_ftn28), you
cried out with bitter lamentation, pure Virgin, ‘Alas, how do you
suffer, my Son, who wish to deliver all from passions’.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[You alone know the weakness of mortals and in compassion took its
form; gird me with power from on high, to cry to you: Holy the living
temple of your ineffable glory, O lover of mankind\!\]

Troparia.

DAs you gave birth to the Master of all and are Mistress of all, now
snatch me, O All-unblemished, from the mastery of unclean passions; to
which, though, I have miserably enslaved myself through idleness and
perversity of will.[\[29\]](#_ftn29)

E Being you are ever compassionate, as you alone bore the Lord
compassionate and good, do not reject me, O Immaculate, who am without
compassion and without loving-kindness, but turn me back by your
intercessions.

Z Snatch me, O Virgin, from a tempest of disgraceful thoughts, dangers,
afflictions, and temptations; guide me straight to divine havens and
fill my mind with calm, O only All-praised.

Ode 4. Irmos.  
To the tune: Rod out of Jesse’s root.

Wondrous Avvakoum of old heard your report, O Christ, and cried out in
fear, ‘O God, you will come from Theman, and O Holy One from a shaded,
wooded mountain to save your anointed ones. Glory to your power, O
Lord\!’[\[30\]](#_ftn30)

Troparia.

Σ You endured stripes[\[31\]](#_ftn31) and blows,[\[32\]](#_ftn32) O
Christ, when you were crucified, so healing those of my heart. You
tasted bitter gall,[\[33\]](#_ftn33) so taking away the destructive harm
of tasting that gives pleasure.

Μ When you were lifted up on the Cross,[\[34\]](#_ftn34) you drew near
to you[\[35\]](#_ftn35) the nations that been banished far from you. You
reconciled[\[36\]](#_ftn36) us to the Father, O Long-suffering, placing
yourself in the midst as a Mediator,[\[37\]](#_ftn37) undergoing
shameful suffering in the midst of the earth.[\[38\]](#_ftn38)

Of the Martyrs.

Α The spiritual[\[39\]](#_ftn39) Pharao perished when he fell with all
his hosts into the mystical sea of your blood,[\[40\]](#_ftn40) Martyrs
blessed by God, and, so saved for the land of promise,[\[41\]](#_ftn41)
you have become citizens of heaven.

Ι Fortified by the strength of Christ, they accepted the blessed
passion, sufferings of many kinds in their honoured flesh; and so they
put an end to passions of the souls and bodies of those who celebrate
them and at every moment call them blessed.

Cross-Theotokion.

Τ As she who gave you birth, O Christ, watched your unjust slaughter,
she cried out to you with grief, ‘My Son, just Judge, why have you been
unjustly condemned, who wish to justify those who had been formerly
condemned and slipped down into corruption.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[Avvakoum with foreseeing eyes perceived you as a mountain overshadowed
by the grace of God, from which, he foretold, the Holy One of Israel
would come, for our salvation and refashioning.\]

Troparia.

H Cloud filled with light[\[42\]](#_ftn42), who bore the sun of
righteousness[\[43\]](#_ftn43), Jesus the giver of life and God, shed
light on my soul, which is in a night of sin and blinded by the
darkening of pleasures.

Q Snatch me from being hunted and destroyed by demons who always seek
treacherously to do me evil, Mother of God, ready help of Christians,
respite of the afflicted, all-blameless Sovereign Lady.

I The Lord, to whom you gave birth from your pure blood, pure Virgin, is
my strength and my song[\[44\]](#_ftn44). Therefore implore him
continually that your servant may be kept pure in soul and body.

Ode 5. Irmos.  
To the tune: As you are God of peace.

Light in the hearts of those who sing your praise with faith, O Christ,
your light that never sets, granting us peace that is beyond
understanding, so that as we run from the night of ignorance to the day
of your commandments, we may glorify you, Lover of humankind.

Troparia

Ο The sun was stripped bare of light,[\[45\]](#_ftn45) O Saviour, when
it saw you, who hung the earth upon the waters,[\[46\]](#_ftn46)
stripped naked on the Tree; with fear rocks were split
apart[\[47\]](#_ftn47) upon a rock, when they saw you made away with,
and the foundations of the earth were shaken.[\[48\]](#_ftn48)

Υ You were lifted up on a Tree, long-suffering Lord, and fixed with
nails you drenched your fingers in blood. Your side was pierced,
transfixed by a lance,[\[49\]](#_ftn49) so healing Adam’s wound, which
he suffered when he obeyed his side[\[50\]](#_ftn50) and disobeyed his
Maker.

Of the Martyrs

Π The multitude of Martyrs appeared as Paradise, having in its midst
Christ, the Tree of life,[\[51\]](#_ftn51) through whom, withstanding
shameful death with noble thought, by divine power they put to death the
serpent that once by food had put to death the parents of our
race.[\[52\]](#_ftn52)

Α With the drops of your blood, Athletes of Christ, you dried up the
deep of godlessness, and with divine outpourings of sacred wonders, you
put to an end the outpourings of passions of our souls and bodies;
therefore we fittingly call you blessed.

Cross-Theotokion

Θ When she saw Christ lifted up on the Tree by his own will, the
Blameless Virgin was amazed, and weeping she cried out, ‘My Son and God,
when I gave birth I knew no pangs, but now I suffer pains as you are
unjustly[\[53\]](#_ftn53) crucified by lawless men’.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[O Christ, who enlightened the ends of the world by the brightness of
your coming, and made them radiant by your Cross, enlighten with the
light of your divine knowledge the hearts of those who sing your praise
with right belief.\]

Troparia.

K All-immaculate Virgin, make my soul be bear fruits of virtues by
driving away my unfruitful thoughts, and cutting out root and branch the
thorns of sin that choke[\[54\]](#_ftn54) me.

L Mother of God, through an Angel you contained in your womb beyond
reason the divine Word; entreat him therefore to free your servants from
irrational acts and death-bringing pleasures.[\[55\]](#_ftn55)

M Having withered up through your offspring the sin which sprang from a
tree, wither up my fleshly thoughts and the stirrings and hostile waves
of passions, that I may sing your praise, O
All-praised.[\[56\]](#_ftn56)

Ode 6. Irmos.  
To the tune: The monster from the deep.

I am wholly in the grip of numberless passions, I have fallen together
with a sea monster of evils; but bring me up from corruption, O God, as
you one brought Jonas, and with faith grant me dispassion, that I may
sacrifice to you with a voice of saving praise.[\[57\]](#_ftn57)

Troparia

Ο When Moses stretched his hands on high he was an image of your
passion[\[58\]](#_ftn58), when you stretched your palms on the Tree and
utterly destroyed the destructive power of the evil one; therefore
knowing you to be our Redeemer and Saviour, we sing your praise, Lover
of humankind.

Ν Raised on the Tree you underwent death, put to death the one who put
us to death, O Christ, and gave life to what your hands had fashioned;
while when your side was pierced you poured out two rivers of
forgiveness to those who hymn you with two wills.

Of the Martyrs

Τ Precious is your death, holy Martyrs, in the eyes of the
Lord[\[59\]](#_ftn59), who honoured you all by his precious sufferings
and shamed dishonoured Beliar who schemed to break us by every assault
of punishments.

Ο Wise Martyrs, as you advanced with all your soul to all the forms of
punishments, you found as ally all the help of the One who put on human
nature altogether; and so, as you were torn limb from limb and met the
fire, you rejoiced.

Cross-Theotokion

Σ When the All-pure saw your crucifixion, she cried, ‘My Son, what is
this strange sight that I behold? How do you, who heal the sufferings of
the sick, endure unprecedented suffering? How have your enemies repaid
you, O Benefactor, for all the benefits they have received?’

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[The deepest abyss has surrounded us, there is none to deliver, we have
been counted as sheep for the slaughter; save your people, O God, for
you are the strength and restoration of the weak.\]

Troparia.

N The enemy has been put to death by your life-bearing Fruit, O Full of
God’s grace, death has Hell been clearly trampled on and those in bonds
set free. And so I cry, ‘Do away with the passions of my heart’.

X Estranged as I am from God through badness and set far away,
All-blameless Bride of God, by your wondrous[\[60\]](#_ftn60) mediation
make me his friend, that I may sing the praise of the mighty
acts[\[61\]](#_ftn61) of your power.

O The timeless Son was born in time, being brought to birth from you.
Implore him, pure Virgin, to heal the chronic passions of my heart guide
me to everlasting life.[\[62\]](#_ftn62)

Ode 7. Irmos  
To the tune, The Youths brought up together

The Youths, who of old were clearly revealed as holy, entered the
unbearable flame of the furnace as if it were a bridal chamber, and
singing with one accord they raised the hymn, ‘God of our Fathers,
blessed are you’.[\[63\]](#_ftn63)

Troparia

Ο Though you are Master, my Jesu, you accepted a blow from a
slave[\[64\]](#_ftn64), as you sought to free from my enslavement to the
fiend[\[65\]](#_ftn65); while nailed to the Cross you save me as I sing,
‘God of our Fathers, blessed are you’.

Ν All creation was shaken[\[66\]](#_ftn66) when you were crucified,
compassionate Lord. When you were wounded by a lance, the enemy received
an all-embracing[\[67\]](#_ftn67) blow, but stricken Adam was made
whole, crying out, ‘God of our Fathers, blessed are you’.

Of the Martyrs

Τ The inspired army of Champions, walled about with the Cross, by grace
utterly destroyed the battle lines of the foe, and received crowns of
victory as they cried, ‘God of our Fathers, blessed are you’.

Ο God’s Athletes, having valiantly made the choice of fire, you were not
consumed when you encountered fire, but you burnt up all the evil fuel
of impiety, as you cried out, ‘God of our Fathers, blessed are you’.

Cross-Theotokion

Σ Your Offspring, O Virgin, wondrously gave birth to the ages, and
raised up on the Cross he raised up with himself those who had fallen
and declared them citizens of heaven, as they cried, ‘God of our
Fathers, blessed are you’.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[We the faithful recognise you, O Mother of God, as a spiritual
furnace; for as He, the highly exalted, saved the three Children, so He
wholly refashioned me, humanity, in your womb, the God of our fathers.
praised and glorified above all.\]

Troparia.

P O Gate of light[\[68\]](#_ftn68), open to me the shining gates of
repentance[\[69\]](#_ftn69), barring the entrances of pleasures by your
prayers and chasing away my evil desires, that I may hymn and glorify
your invincible power.

R With the drops of your compassion, all-pure Virgin, wash away the
filth of my soul that afflicts through my inattention, and purify the
eye of my mind, that with unceasing praises I may hymn your mighty
deeds.

S Immaculate, All-blameless, who bore the Source of life, by your
prayers give life to me who have been grievously put to death by the
attacks of the demons, as I sing to your Son, ‘God of the Fathers,
praised and highly glorified\!’

Ode 8. Irmos  
To the tune, The furnace moist with dew.

The furnace bedewed[\[70\]](#_ftn70) with fire revealed of old an image
of a wonder beyond nature, for the fire did not consume the young Men,
depicting the Christ’s divine Nativity without seed from a Virgin.
Therefore let us raise the hymn and sing, ‘Let all creation bless the
Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Troparia

Τ He that by the Spirit stretched out the sky[\[71\]](#_ftn71), has been
willingly stretched out on a Cross; while he has been fastened with
nails, longing to unfasten Adam’s propensities to passions. Therefore
let us raise the hymn and sing, ‘Let all creation bless the Lord and
highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Ο When a stony hearted people, O Word of God, lifted you, the Rock, upon
a rock, mountains were tumbled in confusion, earth quaked, and souls
that had been shaken were made steady for divine life, ever singing,
‘Let all creation bless the Lord and highly exalt him to all the
ages’.

Of the Martyrs

Υ The Champions wove for themselves a robe of salvation, when they
struggled bravely in bodily nakedness and underwent storm showers of
torments; and so they raised a hymn and sang, ‘Let all creation bless
the Lord and highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Ο Though mercilessly rent with iron claws, their limbs relentlessly
hacked off, acquainted with tortures of every kind, the Champions did
not offer sacrifice to wooden gods, but for believers were revealed as
pillars of courage, as they cried, ‘Bless Christ, all you his works, and
highly exalt him to all the ages’.

Cross-Theotokion

Ι ‘So that a rebellious foolish people might, as they supposed, remove
you from the earth, I have become childless, I am troubled and as a
mother am anguished in heart’, cried she who knew not wedlock, ‘when she
saw you lifted up on a Cross’. With her creation glorifies you, Jesu,
Redeemer of all, to the ages.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[In the furnace as in a smelter the Israelite Youths shone with the
beauty of godliness brighter than gold as they said, ‘All you his works
bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages’.\]

Troparia.

T The acquisition of passions, the abuse of demons tyrannise me, but
with you as refuge I am saved, O Immaculate, as I sing to your Son, ‘All
you his works bless the Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the
ages’.

Y Pure Virgin, higher than the heavens, make higher than matter and than
life’s transgressions my mind that sings, ‘Let all creation bless the
Lord, praise and highly exalt him to all the ages’.

F Virgin wholly light, who gave birth to God, the Giver of light,
illuminate the eyes of my heart with the light of the knowledge of God,
that I may chant, ‘All you his works bless the Lord, praise and highly
exalt him to all the ages’.[\[72\]](#_ftn72)

Ode 9. Irmos  
To the tune, A strange and wonderful mystery.

Ineffable is the mystery of the Virgin. For she has been revealed as
heaven, the cherubim throne[\[73\]](#_ftn73) and the light-bearing
bridal chamber[\[74\]](#_ftn74) of Christ, God the Almighty. As Mother
of God her we devoutly magnify.

Troparia

Ω When of old he saw you hung upon a Tree, O Saviour, who hung the earth
on limitless waters[\[75\]](#_ftn75), the good Thief cried out to you
with faith, ‘Remember’.[\[76\]](#_ftn76) With him we devoutly glorify
your sufferings.

Σ When crucified you shook the foundations of the earth; pierced by a
lance you poured out drops of immortality, blood and
water[\[77\]](#_ftn77), through which you purified humanity of passions,
O Jesu, whom fittingly we magnify.

Of the Martyrs

Η The Saints rejoiced in their torments, urging themselves forward as to
enjoyment. ‘Let us take our stand\!’[\[78\]](#_ftn78) cried the heroes,
‘See, the stadium is open. Christ now holds out crowns for those he
has loved’.

Φ The whole throng of believers is radiant as it honours the contests of
all the invincible Martyrs, the ten thousand pains, through which they
were found worthy of delight without pain, of life and unending
contentment.

Cross-Theotokion

Φ Maiden, who bore ineffably the Word who loves humankind, when you saw
him suffering willingly for humanity, you cried, ‘What is this? God, who
knows no passion, endures his Passion, that he may deliver from passions
those who worship him with faith’.

Another, of the Mother of God. Irmos.

\[The burning bush that was not consumed was a type of your pure
child-bearing; quench for us now the raging furnace of temptations we
pray, O Mother of God, that we may unceasingly magnify you.\]

Troparia.

X Rejoice, you that gave birth to joy\! Rejoice, you that alone make
grief disappear\! Rejoice, you that dispel the clouds from our souls and
illuminated with spiritual light those who with faith and love, O Mother
of God, magnify you\!

Y Dry up all the outpourings[\[79\]](#_ftn79) of my passions, O
All-pure, and parch the limitless deep of my sins, for you gave birth to
a saving rain, a river of peace and a great sea of compassion.

W You appeared as a place of healing without payment for all who have
been wounded and are sick with despair, O Immaculate, as a haven of
salvation for those storm-tossed on the sea of life, in which everyone
who takes refuge there, saved by faith, glorifies you.

Exapostilarion. Women hear.

We hymn and with faith we worship the divine Cross, the invincible
weapon, the support of the Faith. As is fitting we proclaim aloud the
great refuge, the boast of Christians, the guardian of the Orthodox, the
glory of the Champions.

Another. As God you adorned.

Cross of my Christ, great weapon of the Orthodox, victory of Sovereigns,
defeat of demons, protect those who worship you in faith and give us
your grace.

Another, to the same tune.

Those who with all devotion and undoubting hearts worship the Cross and
sufferings of your Son, Mother of God, show to be citizens of Paradise
and partakers in glory.

Aposticha of Lauds, of the Cross. Tone 1.

We ceaselessly sing your praise as Saviour and Master, who was nailed to
the Tree and granted us life.

Through your Cross, O Christ, there has come into being one flock of
Angels and of mortals and one Church. Heaven and earth rejoice. Lord,
glory to you\!

Of the Martyrs.

All-praised Martyrs, nor tribulation, nor suffering, nor starvation, nor
persecution, nor scourgings, nor the rage of wild beasts, nor sword nor
threatening fire could separate you from God; rather through love for
him as though in bodies not your own you struggled and surpassed nature,
despising death; and so you have fittingly received the reward of your
toils and have become heirs of the Kingdom of heaven. Intercede
unceasingly for our souls.

Glory. Both now.* *Cross-Theotokion.  
Joy of the heavenly ranks.

As she stood by your Cross, O Word of God, the Ewe-lamb, your blameless
Mother, cried in lamentation, ‘How can you be dying on a Cross, my Son?
Alas my sweetest light, where has the beauty of your form now set, that
was lovelier than all mortals?’

 

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) This is of course the Apolytikion for the feast of
the Cross.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Cf. Isaias 63:9.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Luke 23:40-43.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) The story is told in great detail by Eusebius in his
life of Constantine (Book 1, Chapters 28-31). He says he it from
Constantine himself. The other contemporary account is by Lactantius in
chapter 44 of his *De Mortibus Persecutorum*. This speaks only of a
‘dream’ and nothing of the appearance of the Cross in the sky. Both
writers agree that the standard consisted of the *Chi-Rho*, in Eusebius
this is made into a banner, or *labarum*, in Lactantius the soldiers are
ordered to mark it on their shields.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Galatians 6:14.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Cf. Isaias 40:12

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) This is the common Apolytikion of Many Martyrs.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Unusually the Irmi of this Canon are prosomia to
another set of Irmi, in this case those of the first Canon for
Christmas. Another example is the set of Irmi by St Theodore the Studite
for the Sunday of Cross in Lent, though in this instance there is a
clear theological reason for it. The provision of new texts for this
Tuesday may be to avoid singing the Christmas Irmi unseasonally,
although in current practice only the Irmi of the first canon are used.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Exodus 14-15.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) This phrase is from 1 Corinthians 2:6 and is
therefore almost always used in connection with the Crucifixion. It is
frequently inscribed on pectoral crosses and other depictions of the
crucified Lord.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) St Romanos speaks of human nature as ‘thorny’ in a
number of his Kontakia. For example in *On the Apostle Thomas* (Strophe
2): ‘For from Thomas’s hand I believe in Moses’ story; For though it was
perishable and thorny it was not consumed As it handled the side like a
burning flame’. See also *On the Nativity* (Strophe 11). The idea very
probably derives from St Ephrem the Syrian.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Luke 2:35.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) John 19:34.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Genesis 3:24.

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) In Greek témenoV, which means the sacred area in
which a temple stood.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) One of the features of this Canon is a series of
plays on cognate words. In this troparion we have ÀgioV, üperágioV and
ägiasmóV.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Jeremias 9:22. I Reigns 2:10, which is part of Ode
3 (I Reigns 2:1-10). The Greek of the latter passage is quite different
from, and much longer than, the Hebrew. The Latin Vulgate here follows
the Hebrew, and so do all English translations of the Bible.

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Psalm 21:17.

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Genesis 2:7. The word is used of a potter working
with clay and is used in the OT especially of God in creation, and by
contrast also of the fashioners of idols.

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Jesus (‘Joshua’) 10:12-13. In the Orthodox
Scriptures Moses’ successor, who saved the people of Israel after Moses’
death and led them in the conquest of the Promised Land, is called
‘Jesus’, and because of his name he is frequently evoked typologically
in the liturgical texts. The use of the Protestant pseudo-Hebrew word
‘Joshua’ obscures this and it, and other Protestant pseudo-Hebraisms,
should be shunned by the Orthodox.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) Cf. Genesis 1:14-16, where the sun and moon are not
named but simply referred to as ‘luminaries’.**

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) The darkening of the sun and moon is an echo of
Amos 8:9. Matthew 27:45, Luke 23:44-45, who mentions the sun
specifically.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) This could also refer to the  Cross, but since
‘Master’ is the nearer antecedent in Greek, I have taken it as
referring to Christ.

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) This verb, *paradeigmatizein*, occurs only twice in
Scripture, once of St Joseph’s not wishing to put Mary to public shame
(Matt. 1:19, where modern critical texts have the simple verb
*deigmatizein*, not the compound), and at Hebrews 6:6, where the Apostle
says that apostates, ‘crucify the Son of God again and put him to public
contempt’. The poet has the latter passage in mind.

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) ‘Beliar’ is one of the frequent names used for the
devil in the liturgical texts, yet it only occurs once in the Orthodox
Bible, at 2 Cor. 6:15. In the OT the word ‘belial’, which in Hebrew
means ‘worthlessness’, ‘good for nothing’, occurs many times, but it is
never taken to be a proper name in the lxx, which translates it by
‘lawless’, ‘pestilent’ and other such words. The Vulgate and older
English versions tended to treat the word as a proper name, but most
modern versions do not so regard it. In later writings, such as the Dead
Sea Scrolls, the *Testament of Levi* and the *Ascension of Isaias*, it
has become a name for the devil. In the latter we read (2:4), ‘And
Manasses turned away his own heart to serve Beliar —for the angel of
lawlessness, who is the ruler of this world, is Beliar’. The source of
the usage of the liturgical texts is, therefore, almost certainly 2
Corinthians.

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) This word, used here in the plural, means literally
‘a nod or inclination of the head’ and so ‘assent or approval’. The
Latin equivalent is *nutus*. Whereas superior persons, kings, popes,
bishops and suchlike, are *Dei providentia*, or *Dei gratia*, minor
dignitaries are sometimes described as *Dei nutu*.

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) Psalm 44:3.

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Isaias 53:2.

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) This troparion plays DéspothV, Déspoina and
despoteía.

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) Avvakoum 3:1-3. The notes in *La Bible
d’Alexandrie*, XXIII: 4-9, are particularly valuable on these verses.
Because Theman is in the south, for the Fathers it signifies Bethlehem,
south of Jerusalem, the place where Christ was born. The words ‘shaded’
and ‘wooded’ are both ‘translations’ of the Hebrew name *Paran*, which
was linked by the translator with a rare Hebrew word meaning ‘bough’.

[\[31\]](#_ftnref31) Galatians 6:17, the only use of the word in the NT.

[\[32\]](#_ftnref32) 1 Peter 2:24, the only use of the word in the NT.

[\[33\]](#_ftnref33) Matthew 27:34, Psalm 68:22.

[\[34\]](#_ftnref34) John 12:32.

[\[35\]](#_ftnref35) Cf. Ephesians 2:13.

[\[36\]](#_ftnref36) Romans 5:10, 1 Corinthians 5:18.

[\[37\]](#_ftnref37) 1 Timothy 2:5.

[\[38\]](#_ftnref38) Psalm 73:12.

[\[39\]](#_ftnref39) Greek nohtóV.

[\[40\]](#_ftnref40) Cf. Exodus 14.

[\[41\]](#_ftnref41) Hebrews 11:9.

[\[42\]](#_ftnref42) Cf. Exodus 13:21 and the numerous passages
throughout the Old Testament which refer to the cloud overshadowing the
temple; also the ‘light/swift cloud’ in Isaias 19:1.

[\[43\]](#_ftnref43) Malachy 3:20.

[\[44\]](#_ftnref44) Ps. 117:14.

[\[45\]](#_ftnref45) Cf. Matthew 27:45, Luke 23:44-45.

[\[46\]](#_ftnref46) Cf. Psalms 135:6, 103:3, and Antiphon 15 of Matins
of Good Friday.

[\[47\]](#_ftnref47) Cf. Matthew 27:51.

[\[48\]](#_ftnref48) Cf. Matthew 27:51, Psalm 81:5, 17:8.16, Isaias
24:18.

[\[49\]](#_ftnref49) John 19:34.

[\[50\]](#_ftnref50) Eve, cf. Genesis 2:21.

[\[51\]](#_ftnref51) Genesis 2:9.

[\[52\]](#_ftnref52) Genesis 3.

[\[53\]](#_ftnref53) The musical punctuation suggests that the adverb
could modify ‘suffer’. The grammar allows either. The many similar texts
in the service books support the translation above.

[\[54\]](#_ftnref54) Matt. 13:22, Mark 4:19, Luke 8:14. The only uses of
this word in the Bible are these three in the parable of the sower.

[\[55\]](#_ftnref55) This troparion plays on the words lógoV, ’word’,
but also ‘reason’ and ÁlogoV, ’irrational’.

[\[56\]](#_ftnref56) The first half of the troparion develops a
horticultural metaphor, based on the story of the Fall—‘sin which
sprouted by a tree’—with an allusion to the Cross—‘your shoot’.

[\[57\]](#_ftnref57) Jonas 2:1-10. There is a number of verbal echoes of
Jonas’s prayer in this troparion. The image in the second clause is, as
the commentators say, ‘bold’.

[\[58\]](#_ftnref58) Exodus 17:11-13.

[\[59\]](#_ftnref59) Ps. 115:6.

[\[60\]](#_ftnref60) Literally ‘strange’, with a play on the first word
of the troparion, but this really does not work in contemporary English.

[\[61\]](#_ftnref61) Appropriately this is the word used by the Mother
of God in the Church’s text of the *Magnificat*, ‘For he that is mighty
has done great things for me’ (Luke 1:49).

[\[62\]](#_ftnref62) A further series of plays on words, here on the
words ÁcronoV—‘timeless’—, crónoV—‘time’ and crónioV—‘chronic’.

[\[63\]](#_ftnref63) Daniel 3:51-52.

[\[64\]](#_ftnref64) John 18:22. The word only occurs four times in the
Bible, here and in the plural at Mark 14:65, John 19:3 and Isaias 50:6,
‘I gave my back to scourges and my cheeks to blows’.

[\[65\]](#_ftnref65) The word *alastor* is used frequently of the devil
in the liturgical texts, but it only occurs four times in the
Septuagint, three of them in 4 Maccabees and one in 2 Maccabees, where
it is used of Antiochus Epiphanes and once of the ‘avenger’ who will
punish him. In classical Greek it seems to have originally meant an
‘avenging deity’.

[\[66\]](#_ftnref66) Matt. 27:51.

[\[67\]](#_ftnref67) Literally ‘of the whole body’, but the devil has no
body.

[\[68\]](#_ftnref68) This is the title of one of the best known Ethiopic
hymns to the Mother of God.

[\[69\]](#_ftnref69) The phrase ‘gates of repentance’ is not scriptural,
nor does it occur in any of the principal Fathers. It is, of course,
well known from the Troparion after Psalm 50 at Sunday Matins in the
Triodion. The nearest biblical text is Ps. 117:19, ‘Open to me the gates
of justice—dikaiosúnhV’, and the liturgical text seems to be an
adaptation of it.

[\[70\]](#_ftnref70) This word is only attested once in Greek, from the
7th century writer Leontios of Neapolis, as quoted by St John of
Damascus, by whom it is used of the Burning Bush.

[\[71\]](#_ftnref71) Cf. Ps. 103:2.

[\[72\]](#_ftnref72) Even in English the play on the word ‘light’ is
clear. In fact the Greek uses three different words, ölófwtoV—‘wholly
light’, fwtodótoV—‘giver of light’, and fôV—‘light’.

[\[73\]](#_ftnref73) The ‘cherubim throne’ is a reference to the divine
chariot in Ezekiel 1. Later, in chapter 10, the four living creatures
are identified by the prophet as the cherubim: ‘And the Cherubim were
lifted up. This was the living creature I had seen by the river Chobar’
(10,15).  The Greek text has a number of variant readings here. I
translate what is most likely to have been the text known to the writer
of the canon.

[\[74\]](#_ftnref74) The word used here for a ‘bridal chamber’ is
*pastas*, which does not occur in Scripture. In the liturgical texts it
nearly always recalls Psalm 18,6, where the word is the related word
*pastos*. In a fragment on Psalm 18, attributed to St Athanasios, both
words are found together with the typology of the Mother of God. Παστὸν
τὴν Παρθένον ἐκάλεσεν, ἐξ ἧς ὁ νυμφίος Χριστὸς ἐπορεύετο, παντὸς ῥύπου
καθαρὸς, ἀπὸ καθαρᾶς παστάδος προερχόμενος. Παστὰς δὲ τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἡ
ἁγία Παρθένος. ‘He called the Virgin ‘bridal chamber’—*pastos*—,
from whom Christ the Bridegroom proceeded, coming forth pure from every
stain. Christ’s bridal chamber—*pastas*— is the holy Virgin’.

[\[75\]](#_ftnref75) The same language is used in the 15th Antiphon of
Matins of Good Friday. 

[\[76\]](#_ftnref76) Luke 23,42.

[\[77\]](#_ftnref77) Matt. 27:51, John 19:34.

[\[78\]](#_ftnref78) As the deacon says at the opening of the anaphora.

[\[79\]](#_ftnref79) This word presents a problem, though the meaning is
clear. It is not in Liddell and Scott and in Lampe it is only given as
an erroneous reading Migne’s text of the seventh century George of
Pisidia’s *Hexaemeron*.**

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

