\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone1.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat1ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Midnight](sun1nc.md) \]
\[ [Sunday Matins](sun1mc.md) \] \[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Wednesday Matins](wednesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins2.md) \]
\[ [Friday Matins](friday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Matins](saturday_matins1.md) \] \[ Weekday Vespers \]

**WEEKDAY VESPERS  
FROM THE  OCTOICHOS**

## INTRODUCTION

A number of Orthodox Christians like to make daily Vespers their evening
prayer and so we hope provide over the next few weeks the texts for
Vespers for weekdays in the eight tones from the Octoichos.

On weekdays there are always six stichera at ‘Lord, I have cried’, of
which three are normally taken from the Octoichos and three from the
Menaion. In some monasteries two are taken from the first set in the
Octoichos and one from the second. If the Menaia are not to hand, the
General Menaion may be used, or, if one prefers, all six from the
Octoichos, which was probably the older use. If the Saints of the day
have their own doxastikon, then the strict Typikon orders all six
stichera to be from the Menaion, with the stichera doubled.

On Friday evening the first Theotokion is always that used on the
preceding Saturday evening, regardless of the tone of the doxastikon, if
there is one.

The Psalm verses for the Aposticha can be found on Sunday, except for
those for Friday, which are special.

The phrase which ends many troparia in Greek, literally ‘the great
mercy‘, I translate by ‘his/your great mercy‘, because it echoes the
opening of Psalm 50, which in Greek literally means ‘the great mercy of
you‘; in English, ‘your great mercy‘.

## TONE 1

In Tone 1 all the stichera for ‘Lord , I have cried’ use one of two
melodies, ‘All-praised Martyrs’ and ‘Joy of the heavenly hosts’. The
‘Automela’, or ‘model’ troparia, can be found at the Aposticha; the
former on both Wednesday and Friday and the latter on Sunday.  That on
Friday occurs, somewhat curiously, among a set of Idiomela. None of the
translations of these texts is metrical.

-----

#  TONE 1

ON SUNDAY EVENING

# AT VESPERS

At Lord, I have cried, Stichera of Com­punction, to the Lord.

Tone 1. All-praised Martyrs.

Through goodness you brought all things into being, Lord, by your Word
and Spirit[\[1\]](#_ftn1); then you made me, a rational
animal[\[2\]](#_ftn2), that I might glorify your holy name, O
All-powerful; but instead I ever dishonour it by my shameful deeds: but
spare me I beg.

Learn, my wretched soul, of God’s kindness and the incorruptible
fatherland, and ever hasten to obtain it by good works. Fix to yourself
nothing of things which perish; your destiny is on high, while the body
is earth and decays; may what is worse not defeat the better.

Come, my most miserable soul, with fervent tears approach the One who is
supremely good; before your judgement confess all that you have done;
make the Creator have pity on you, poor wretch, and ask pardon, before
the Lord shuts the door against you[\[3\]](#_ftn3).

Others, of the Bodiless Powers. Same melody.

Bodiless Angels, who stand before the throne of God and blaze with the
rays that shine from there, who gleam eternally with light outpoured,
and are named the second lights, intercede with Christ that peace be
given to our souls and his great mercy.

Immortal Angels of God, all-blessed ones, who from the first life have
truly received life that cannot be destroyed, and, as revered beholders
of eternal glory, have become filled with the light of eternal wisdom
and revealed as torches in close serried ranks.

Archangels, Angels, Principalities, Thrones, Dominions, six-winged
Seraphim and many-eyed Cheru­bim, the godlike instru­ments of wisdom,
Powers and most godly Rulers[\[4\]](#_ftn4), intercede with Christ that
peace be given to our souls and his great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Same melody.

Mary, the unblemished chariot[\[5\]](#_ftn5) of purity that surpasses
every mind, direct me, who am held fast and hemmed in by many sins, to
the broad plain of repentance by your all-powerful protection, for, as
Mother of the One who is strong in every way, you can do this.

Aposticha of Compunction.

Because I have sunk in the deep ocean of my transgressions, Saviour, and
have been dreadfully overwhelmed by my offences, give me your hand, O
God, as to Peter, and save me[\[6\]](#_ftn6).

Verse 1. ** I have lifted my eyes, to you who dwell in heaven. Behold as
the eyes of servants look to their lords’ hands; as the eyes of a maid
to her mistress’s hands, so do our eyes to the Lord our God, until you
take pity on us.

Because I have been condemned, O Saviour,  by my evil thoughts and
deeds, grant me the idea of turning back, O God, that I may cry, ‘Save
me, good Benefactor, and have mercy on me’.

Verse 2. Have mercy on us, Lord, have mercy on us, for we have had our
fill of contempt, our soul has been filled to overflowing. Let reproach
be for the prosperous, and contempt for the proud.

Of the Martyrs.

At the intercession, Lord, of all the Saints and of the Mother of God,
give us your peace and have mercy on us, as you alone are full of pity.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Model melody.

Joy of the heavenly hosts, mighty defence of humans upon earth,
immaculate Virgin, save us who have recourse to you, for, after God, we
have placed all our hope in you.

#### ON MONDAY EVENING

##### AT VESPERS

At Lord, I have cried we insert Prosomia of Compunction to the Lord.

Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Wholly drowned in a sea of sins and held fast in an abyss of offences, I
cry to you, Master supremely good, ‘Ransom me from troubles and from
trials of many different kinds, and from the unquenchable fire’.

Sunk deep in despair and full of hostile thoughts, in my wretchedness I
have put all my hopes in you, O Word of God: ransom me from invisible
and visible foes.

You took pity, O Creator, on every creature through your love for
humankind, and your ineffable poverty, O Word of God, who take away the
sin of the world[\[7\]](#_ftn7) as you as compassionate. Take away my
burden also and lighten my most heavy yoke[\[8\]](#_ftn8).

Others of the Forerunner. All-praised martyrs.

Wondrous Prophet, Baptist and Forerunner of Christ, through your prayers
make my heart, which is dried up through offences, flow with
ever-flowing rivers of tears I beg you, so that I, who am much-pained,
may be saved and magnify him who magnified you.

Blest Prophet, I place all my hopes and the life of my expectation in
you. You baptized Christ Jesus, the abyss, who takes away the offences
of the world; implore him, John, I beg you, to cleanse my heart and save
me.

Herald of the grace of Christ, godly Forerunner, who proclaimed
repentance [\[9\]](#_ftn9)beforehand to all the nations, guide my
wretched and fevered soul to cleave to repentance and ever to do the
wishes of the Lord, that with faith and love I may glorify you.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Same melody.

Pure Virgin, you alone were declared the dwelling of the Light which
shone out from the Father[\[10\]](#_ftn10); therefore I cry to you: Make
bright my soul, darkened by the passions, with the light of the virtues,
and make her dwell in tents of light on the day of judgement, O
Immaculate.

Aposticha of compunction.

Because the sea of my faults is great, O Saviour, and I have been
drowned deep by my offences, give me your hand as once you did to Peter,
save me, O God, and have mercy on me.

Because I have been condemned by evil ideas and deeds, O Saviour, grant
me the thought of returning, O God, that I may cry, ‘Good Benefactor,
save me, and have mercy on me’.

Of the Martyrs.

Your confession in the stadium, O Saints, routed the power of the demons
and freed humankind from error. And so, as your heads were cut off, you
cried, ‘May the sacrifice of our lives be acceptable to you, O Lord,
because longing for you we despised this temporary life, O Lover of
humankind’.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Accepting the supplications of sinners and not despising the groaning of
the afflicted, intercede with the One who came from your pure womb,
All-holy Virgin, that we may be saved.

# ON TUESDAY EVENING

### AT VESPERS

At Lord, I have cried we insert Prosomia of the Cross.

Tone 1. All-praised Martyrs.

You stretched out your immaculate palms on a Tree, O Christ, and covered
your fingers with blood, for you wished, O Lover of humankind, to redeem
the work of your hands: Adam who by his transgression was held fast by
the kingdom of death and whom you raised by your all-mighty power.

By being nailed to the Cross as man, Christ our God, you made human
nature divine; by slaying the serpent you freed us from the curse which
came from the tree[\[11\]](#_ftn11), as you are compassionate becoming a
curse[\[12\]](#_ftn12) yourself and granting the world blessing and your
great mercy.

All honour being your due in that other world, compassionate Master, you
were well-pleased to be dishonoured, undergoing the shameful death on
the Tree, through which the human race plucked immortality and regained
its former life, when you died in the flesh, O All-powerful.

Of the Mother of God, to the same melody.

From agonising pain in the feet, paralysis of knees, fracture of limbs
and joints, weakness of hands and feet, rescue me, O All Pure, and from
the harm that comes from different fluxes, keeping me undefiled by all
of these by the love of my God and Fashioner.

Wretch that I am, I bowed down beneath dreadful passions, and I have
done wholly profligate deeds of shame, whose base images and fantasies
even now batter, confuse and turn me to sensual enjoyment of them in the
sensations of my heart. But do you, O Pure one, save me.

My life has become full of many temptations, O All-pure, from the many
evils with which I have offended; but ransom me from both and give me
both a mind and a life that are without offence and a sober reason, that
in faith I may call you blessed and glorify your godly name.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Same melody.

The Virgin, when she saw your unjust slaughter, O Christ, cried out to
you in bitter grief, ‘My sweetest Child, how are you suffering unjustly?
How hanging on the Tree, you that hung the whole earth on the waters? Do
not, compassionate Benefactor, leave me alone, your Mother and your
servant.

Aposticha of the Cross.

A Cross was fixed on Calvary and flowered with immortality for us from
an inexhaustible spring, the Saviour’s side.

The Saviour’s precious Cross is for us an unbreachable wall; for by
trusting in it we are all saved.

Of the Martyrs.

O the excellence of your deeds, O Saints\! For you shed your blood, and
inherited heaven; you were tried for a time, and rejoice eternally.
Truly excellent your exchange, for you abandoned things corruptible and
received things incorruptible, and dancing with the Angels you
ceaselessly hymn the consubstantial Trinity.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion.

‘A sword has passed through my heart’ said the Virgin, as she saw Christ
hanging on the tree, ‘and it rends me, as Symeon foretold to me of
old[\[13\]](#_ftn13). But arise, O Immortal, and glorify your Mother and
handmaid with yourself, I pray’.

# ON WEDNESDAY EVENING

### AT VESPERS

At Lord, I have cried we sing prosomia of the Holy Apostles.

Tone 1. All-praised Martyrs.

Glorious Apostles of Christ, disciples called by God, teachers of the
whole world, having found the Lord, the Mediator between God and men,
you were divinely joined to him and you proclaimed him clearly in the
world as perfect God and perfect man.

All-wise Apostles, intercede that I may shake off the folly of my soul,
as you have been declared to be truly initiates and revealers of wisdom.
Lighting the light of the Paraclete and burning out the rottenness of my
mind, make me worthy to call you blessed.

Apostles, who saw God, flooded the whole round world with divine
teachings and dimmed the darkness of the idols, enlighten my soul,
darkened by the passions; and now intercede that our souls may be given
God’s peace and great mercy.[\[14\]](#_ftn14)

Others, of St Nicholas. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Flying around the flowers of the Church, like a nestling from the nest
of the Angels on high, thrice-blessed Nicolas, you ever cry to God on
behalf of all of us in the constraints of dangers and temptations, and
you free us by your prayers.

Surveying the beauties of things unseen, you understood that dread
glory, O holy of holies. Therefore you make manifest to us the heavenly
utterances of those ever-living contemplations, most holy one.

By practical virtues you made the beauty of your sacred vestment more
resplendent, god-bearing Father. Therefore you minister to us the
wonders of those far-famed contemplations, rescuing us from dangers.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Same melody.

Virgin Mother of God who did not know wedlock, who gave birth to God in
the last times and who was revealed again after childbirth to be a pure
virgin, throne[\[15\]](#_ftn15) and gate[\[16\]](#_ftn16) and mystical
table[\[17\]](#_ftn17) and lampstand[\[18\]](#_ftn18) formed of light.

Aposticha of the Apostles.

The harmonious lyre of the Apostles, struck by the Holy Spirit has
abolished the rites of the loathsome demons, and by proclaiming the one
Lord has freed the nations from the error of idols and taught them to
worship the consubstantial Trinity.

Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Let us together sing the praises of Peter and Paul, Luke, Matthew, Mark,
John, Andrew, Thomas, Bartholomew, Simon the Canaanite, James, Philip;
and let us fittingly praise the whole assembly of the Disciples.

Of the Martyrs. Model Melody.

All-praised Martyrs, earth did not hide you, but heaven received you;
For you the gates of Paradise[\[19\]](#_ftn19) stood open, and now
within you enjoy the Tree of life[\[20\]](#_ftn20). Intercede with
Christ that there be granted to our souls his peace and his great mercy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. Same melody.

Virgin all-praised, Moses with prophetic eyes saw the mystery that is in
you, the bush that though in flames was unburned[\[21\]](#_ftn21). For
the fire of the Godhead did not burn up your womb, pure Maiden. And so
we ask you, as Mother of our God, to grant peace to the world.

ON THURSDAY EVENING

AT VESPERS

At* *Lord I have cried ** Stichera of the Cross.

Tone 1. Joy of the heavenly hosts.

Of old the Forefather tasted death through a tree[\[22\]](#_ftn22); but
now through a precious Tree all the faithful are ransomed from the
condem­nation of death. All that has breath[\[23\]](#_ftn23), let us
glorify him who was willingly crucified for us, and who has given light
to the ends of the earth[\[24\]](#_ftn24).

Hardened in heart, wholly in despair with evil thoughts and being
condemned, I cry out to you: Word of God, alleviate my hidden offences
and the disordered move­ments of my thoughts, for you are compassionate.

We boast in your Cross, O merciful Christ; and, as through it we utterly
destroy the enemy’s deceit, we sing your praise without ceasing: for
willingly lifted up on it in your goodness, O Compassionate, you have
wrought our salvation in the midst of the earth[\[25\]](#_ftn25).

Of the Mother of God. Same melody.

O All-holy Virgin, I ever declare you to be my salvation; in you I am
confident of being saved. Snatch me then from every harm, corruption and
passion; from unlooked for evil; and above all from the merciless
instinct for avarice.

Again I call on you, Virgin, Sovereign Lady, against this passion of
love of money, for truly I fear its attacks more than those of a wild
beast. For love of money[\[26\]](#_ftn26), even in little thrifty
things, is condemned for them.

Mother of God, give me mighty strength each day to look with a joyful
purpose and generous disposition on paupers and strangers and the
multitudes of poor, to embrace non-possession which can make me God’s
own.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion. Same melody.

When the blameless Virgin saw the Lamb suspended on a Cross, she cried
out in lamentation, ‘My sweetest Child, what is this new and wondrous
sight? How are you, the One who holds all things in the hollow of your
hand, nailed in flesh to a tree?’ 

Aposticha of the Cross.

The Cross was planted on Calvary, and blossomed for us with immortality
from the ever-flowing spring of the Saviour’s side.

The Saviour’s precious Cross is an unbreachable wall; for as we have
trusted in it we are all saved.

Of the Martyrs.

At the prayers of your Saints, O Lord, and of the Mother of God, give us
your peace, and have mercy on us, for you alone are compassionate.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion. All-praised Martyrs.

‘Lifted up on the Cross as the just judge, my sweetest Child, by tasting
vinegar and gall[\[27\]](#_ftn27) you have made sweet the bitterness
that Adam tasted of old; therefore, Master, bring sweetness to me, who
taste the bitter potion of your suffering, by rising again as
All-powerful’, cried the Virgin as she wept.

ON FRIDAY EVENING

AT VESPERS**

At ** Lord, I have cried we insert Stichera from the Menaion and of the
Saint of the Monastery. If there is nothing in the Menaion, the
following Prosomia.

Tone 1. All-praised Martyrs.

Of old I died by eating from a tree, urged on by the advice of a
serpent, and was exiled, wretch that I am, from your glory. And so, poor
fool, I have been put to death by sin. Then, Lover of mankind, alone
easily reconciled, make me an inhabitant of Paradise.

Having abandoned all things, my soul, consider your last hour, and make
sure you are prepared for your departure, lest sudden death, finding you
unprepared, come and take you. And so, ever watchful,
pray[\[28\]](#_ftn28) to the Lord and weep.

Slay the thought of the passions that trouble me, and calm my disordered
movements by your divine authority, my God, for you are easily
reconciled, compassionate and lover of humankind, granting me, in your
compassion, forgiveness of faults, through the wealth of your loving
kindness.

Others, of the Mother of God. To the same melody.

Holy Bride of God, make me holy, sanctified and sober, meek, still,
well-ordered, upright and  devout, true, courageous, prudent,
long-suffering, good, fair and measured, blameless, unblemished and
without censure, and beyond all these a partaker in Paradise.

Most pure Virgin, I have become fuel for shameless prodigality, an
investigator of transgression, a teacher of passions, a guide to lust,
entertainer of licentiousness, advocate of intemperance, and I have also
taken pleasure in the thought of them. But deliver me from all
destruction.

Dread torrents of sin dreadfully buffet me, pains of
Hell[\[29\]](#_ftn29) surround me, the spiritual snare of death awaits
me. Merciful Lady, I cry out to you with grief in my heart, ‘Hasten,
snatch me now from the death of despair and from the destruction of
Hell.**

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Let us hymn the whole world’s glory, engendered from humankind and who
gave birth to the Master, the Gate of heaven[\[30\]](#_ftn30), Mary the
Virgin, the song of the Bodiless Powers and adornment of the faithful;
for she has been proclaimed Heaven and Temple of the Godhead. She, by
destroying the middle wall of enmity[\[31\]](#_ftn31), has brought peace
instead and thrown open the King’s palace. Therefore, holding fast to
her as anchor of the faith, we have as champion the Lord born from her.
Take courage therefore, take courage, people of God[\[32\]](#_ftn32);
for he will make war on the foe as All-powerful.

Aposticha for the Martyrs.

Your brave confession in the stadium, O Saints, cowed the power of the
demons and freed mankind from error; and therefore, as your heads were
being struck off, you cried, ‘May the sacrifice of our lives, Lord, be
well-pleasing before you; for longing for you, we despised this
temporary life, O Lover of mankind’.

Verse: God is wonderful in his saints, the God of Israel.

How fair your enterprise, O Saints\! For you gave your blood and
received heaven as your inheritance. You were tested for a time and now
rejoice eternally. Truly your trading was fair\! For you abandoned
things corruptible and received things incorruptible, and now, as you
dance with the Angels, you sing without ceasing the praise of the
consubstantial Trinity.

Verse: For his Saints who in the land the Lord has worked wonders.

\[Model Melody\]

All-praised Martyrs, earth did not hide you, but heaven received you.
For you the gates of Paradise stood open, and now within you enjoy the
Tree of life. Intercede with Christ that there be granted to our souls
his peace and great mercy.

Verse: ** Blessed are those whom you have chosen and taken, O Lord.

For the Dead.

By Monk John, the Damascene. Tone 1.

What pleasure in life remains without its share of sorrow? What glory
stands on earth unchanged? All things are feebler than a shadow; all
things are more deceptive than dreams; one instant, and death supplants
them all. But give rest in the light of your countenance to those whom
you have chosen, O Christ, and in the sweetness of your beauty, as you
love humankind.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

Holy Virgin Mother of God we greet you with our
‘Hail\!’[\[33\]](#_ftn33), honoured treasure of the whole inhabited
world, unquenchable lamp, place[\[34\]](#_ftn34) that contained the
Uncontainable, temple that cannot be destroyed[\[35\]](#_ftn35). Hail to
you, from whom was born the Lamb who takes away the sin of the
world[\[36\]](#_ftn36).

\[When it is Alleluia*,* the Martyrika are sung at ** Lord, I have
cried, while at the Aposticha we say the 1st Martyrikon and the two for
the Dead.\]

  

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Cf. Gen 1,1-3.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Cf. Gen. 2,7.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Matt. 25:10.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) This list derives from passages like Romans 8,38 and
Colossians 1,16, but its precise form of Nine Choirs comes from Denys
the Areopagite, *On the Heavenly Hierarchy*, 6,2 \[PG 3:200-201\].

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Cf. Ezekiel 1.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Matt. 14:28-30.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) John 1:29.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Matt. 11:28-30.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Matt. 3:2.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Cf. Nicene Creed.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Gen. 3.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Deut. 21:23, Gal.3:13.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Luke 2:34-35.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Psalm 50:1.

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) Exod 1:26.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Eze 44:1-3.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Exod. 25:23-30.

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Exod 25:31-35.

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Gen 3:24.

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Gen 2:29; 3.24.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) Exod 3:2.

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) Gen 1-7.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) Psalm 150:6. The only occurrence of the phrase in
the Bible.

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) Cf. Tobit 13:13, following the text of the Codex
Sinaiticus, which is followed by some modern translations.

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) Psalm 73:12.

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) 1 Tim. 6:10.

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) Psalm 68:22; Matt. 27:34.

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Matt. 26:41.

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) Psalm 17:6.

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) Gen. 28:17.

[\[31\]](#_ftnref31) Eph. 2:14.

[\[32\]](#_ftnref32) Baruch 4:5.

[\[33\]](#_ftnref33) Luke 1:28.

[\[34\]](#_ftnref34) Cf. Eze 3:12, where the words, ‘Blessed be the
glory of the Lord, from his place’ occur, when the divine Chariot, also
used as a type of the Mother of God, at the end of his initial vision
and call.

[\[35\]](#_ftnref35) Cf. John 2:19.

[\[36\]](#_ftnref36) John 1:29

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

