\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](tone2.md) \]
\[ [Saturday Evening](sat2ec.md) \] \[ [Sunday Matins](sun2mc.md) \]
\[ [Monday Matins](monday_matins1.md) \]
\[ [Tuesday Matins](tuesday_matins.md) \]
\[ [Thursday Matins](thursday_matins1.md) \] \[ Weekday Vespers \]

# WEEKDAY VESPERS TONE 2

ON SUNDAY EVENING

At Lord, I have cried, Prosomia of the Lord.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

Give me the thought of repentance, give too the desire for compunction
to my lowly soul; rouse me from the sleep of dread hardness, drive away
the darkness of sloth, and banish the fog of despair, that I, poor
wretch, may raise my head and cling to you, O Word, and walk in your
wishes.

O Christ, alone easy to be entreated, com­passionate Word, alone
supremely good and alone forbearing, I fall before you, I fervently
implore you; in sup­plication I cry to you, ‘I have sinned, save, save
me, the Prodigal,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) in your compassion, that with
thanksgiving I may cry: Lord, give me pardon, and I shall walk in your
goodness’.

All that I have sinned against you, my God,  in words and deeds and in
desires, all I confess, now I tell you all; for I have passed through
the day and the whole time, but reached the night, full of wickedness;
therefore I fall before you as I cry, ‘My Master, Master and Saviour, I
have sinned, pardon and save me’.

Others, of the Bodiless Powers. Same melody.

Come, let us praise in spiritual songs the princes of the Angels, for,
as leaders of all the Bodiless choirs, they are both called Chief
Captains and Archangels; for Gabriel is ruler of grace,[\[2\]](#_ftn2)
and the prince of Archangels, Michael, is recognized as com­mander of
law and those before Moses.[\[3\]](#_ftn3)

Hail, beacon of the Bodiless Powers, hail, Chief Captain of the
immaterial choir, initiate and chief messenger of the ineffable
mysteries of God, all-blessed Michael, eye-witness of things on high. We
entreat you to rescue from all difficulties and dangers those who have
recourse to you. For we all present you to the Lord as our kindly
defender.

Hail, Captain of the Angels, initiate of ineffable mysteries and
minister of God; exalted prince of the Bodiless Choirs, most glorious
Gabriel; for you appeared as servant of dread mysteries of the secret,
mystical counsel; for you came down to announce to us beforehand for our
salva­tion the supreme condescension of God towards humankind.

Aposticha of Compunction.

I have sinned against you, O Saviour, like the Prodigal son, receive me
repentant, my Father, and have mercy on me, O God[\[4\]](#_ftn4).

I cry to you, Christ Saviour, with the words of the Publican, ‘Be
merciful to me, as to him, and have mercy on me, O God’[\[5\]](#_ftn5).

Verse 1. To you I lift up my eyes, to you who are enthroned in the
heavens. As the eyes of servants look to the hand of their master: or as
the eyes of a maid toward the hand of her mistress, so our eyes look to
the Lord our God: until he show us his mercy.

Of the Martyrs.

Having no love for earthly enjoyment, the Champions were found worthy of
heavenly good things, and have become fellow citizens of Angels. Lord,
at their intercessions have mercy and save us.

Verse 2. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we have our
fill of derision; our soul has its fill. Mockery for those at ease: and
derision for the proud.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion*.*

Gate mystically sealed, through which none may pass,[\[6\]](#_ftn6)
blessed Virgin Mother of God, receive our supplications and bring them
to your Son and God, that through you he may save our souls.

ON MONDAY EVENING

At Lord, I have cried Prosomia of the Lord.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

O Christ, alone without sin, alone forbearing, alone source of goodness,
see my constraint, see my affliction and wipe away all the scars of my
wounds; and in mercy save your servant; that when I have driven the
clouds of despondency far away I may glorify you, my Saviour supremely
good.

Look, O my miserable soul, see your deeds, how utterly defiled they are;
see your nakedness, alas, and your isolation, for you are about to be
parted from God and Angels and cast into unending torment. Be vigilant,
rouse yourself, hurry, cry out, ‘I have sinned, O Saviour, grant me
pardon and save me’.

I have dreadfully defiled my body, I have corrupted my soul and heart
with foul thoughts; I have wounded all my senses, I have befouled my
eyes, stained my ears, polluted my tongue with words, and I possess all
that is base. Therefore I fall down before you and cry, ‘Master Christ,
I have sinned, I have sinned. Pardon and save me’.

Others of the Forerunner. Same melody.

Hasten, rescue me from temptations, glorious Prophet of the Lord, I
implore you; for in vain have the harsh demons who make war on me been
moved against me, as they seek to snatch away the soul of your servant
like a pitiable sparrow. Do not finally abandon me, but rather let them
know that you are my refuge.

All-holy shoot of a barren mother, fair blossom of the wilderness, fair
swallow, sweet-voiced nightingale, golden dove, make my ever barren,
wretched soul fruitful of good deeds, that it may bring forth a ear that
bears a hundredfold,[\[7\]](#_ftn7) blessed Saint, and offer you praise
inspired by God.

Deliver me, I implore you, O Forerunner, from eternal fire, darkness
without light, constraint and every affliction, every misery, every
tribulation, and show me, who am self-condemned by my offences, to have
my part with the saved by your prayers, blessed Saint, where the choirs
of the saints are found and where there is inexpressible joy.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. The same.

Afflictions and dread assaults, and passions of many kinds buffet my
miserable soul, Maiden who knew not wedlock, Mother of Christ God.
Appear to me as pilot in the sea of life and calm the tempest that
assails me, guiding to a calm harbour of repentance one who takes refuge
under your divine protection.

Aposticha of Compunction.

I have sinned against you, Saviour, like the Prodigal Son. Accept me,
Father, as I repent and have mercy on me, O God.[\[8\]](#_ftn8)

I cry to you, Christ Saviour, in the words of the Publican: Be gracious
to me as to him, and have mercy on me, O God.[\[9\]](#_ftn9)

Of the Martyrs.

As the holy Martyrs intercede for us and praise Christ, every error is
ended and the human race is saved by faith.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

All my hope I set on you, Mother of life, guard me beneath your
protection.

## on Tuesday evening

At Lord, I have cried, we insert Prosomia of the Cross.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

Saviour, when you were nailed to the Cross, the sun, seeing it, was
darkened from fear of you and the veil of the Temple was rent, the earth
was shaken and the rocks likewise were split apart in terror, not having
strength to see their Creator on the Tree, suffering unjustly by his own
counsel and mocked by lawless men.[\[10\]](#_ftn10)

The all-evil serpent was utterly cast down to earth, utterly routed and
lay a lifeless corpse, when you were lifted up on the Tree, O Lover of
mankind. Adam is freed from the curse, and he, before condemned, is
saved.[\[11\]](#_ftn11) Therefore, we beg, save us too, take pity on all
and make us worthy of your Kingdom.

You accept judgement, only King, who are going to judge the universe at
your coming; while you wore a crown of thorns, Saviour, Lover of
humankind, by your power plucking out the thorn of deception by the
roots, implanting the knowledge of your compassion in all those who sing
the praise of your crucifixion.

Others, of the Mother of God. When from the Tree.

Wealth of the beggared, delight and refuge of the poor and hope of
orphans are you, Sovereign Lady, and we glorify you, crying out in
affliction, ‘Holy of Holies, come now and rescue your servants from all
assaults of demons, dread punishment and eternal condemnation’.

Truly the multitudes of my offences engulf my head, Pure Maiden, my
iniquities are greatly multiplied and I, wretch and uncorrected, have
acquired insupportable and numberless burdens. Therefore, only
correction of sinners, by your fervent intercession, come now and save
me.

As to a harbour I hasten under your holy protection, pure Virgin Mother,
and I beg: have compassion, do not reject me, your servant, but deliver
me from my present tribulation, for you are by nature compassionate.
Mother of God most high, as you ever intercede, save your servants from
troubles.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion. Same melody.

Pure Virgin, when you saw the ripe grape Cluster[\[12\]](#_ftn12) that
you had bore unhusbanded in your womb hanging upon the Tree, lamenting
you bewailed him and cried out, ‘My Child, who drop down sweetness;
Benefactor, through whom may all the drunkenness of the passions be
abolished by divine consolations, through me who gave you birth, for you
are compassionate’.

Aposticha of the Cross.

Save me, Christ Saviour, by the power of the Cross, who saved Peter in
the sea,[\[13\]](#_ftn13) and have mercy on me, O God.

You have revealed the Tree of your Cross as a tree of
life,[\[14\]](#_ftn14) Christ our God, to us who believe in you; and
through it you destroyed the one who held the might of death and made
us, who had been slain by sin, alive. And so we cry to you: Benefactor
of all, Lord, glory to you.

Of the Martyrs.

Choirs of Martyrs stood before the tyrants saying, ‘We are soldiers for
the King of powers. Even if you destroy us by fire and torments, we will
not deny the power of the Trinity’.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion. When from the Tree.

Having endured many pains by the crucifixion of your Son and God, with
tears and lamentations you groaned, O Immaculate, ‘Alas, my sweetest
Child, how do you suffer, wishing to redeem those born of earth from
Adam?’ Therefore, all-holy Virgin, we entreat you in faith, make him
merciful to us.

##### ON WEDNESDAY EVENING

At Lord, I have cried, Prosomia of the Apostles.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

When the Word had appeared upon earth, godly Apostles, you were seen
like trumpets, you made his salvation manifest to all and you gathered
peoples to the inspired Faith, laying waste the fortresses of error.
Therefore, blessed ones, you have worthily received the honours and
crowns of victory.

Companies of Angels, truly rejoicing, clapped their hands on high as
they saw the sacred Disciples proclaiming with boldness the incarnation
of the Lord and crying out to all, ‘This is our God, who is before the
ages; he has willingly taken flesh, yet he is enthroned with the Father
and equal in honour with the Spirit’.

Fishermen of the inhabited world, speedily rescue my soul, caught on the
hook by the devices of the foe, and save me now, who am in despair,
giving me strength, godly Apostles, to bear fruits of repentance, so
that I may not experience the fire of hell, but be found worthy of the
Kingdom of heaven.

Others of St Nicolas. Same melody.

Surrounded by a multitude of temptations, hemmed in by the waves of
life, drowning in a swell of troubles and tossed about by griefs, I
place all my hope in you, Father Nicolas; grant me deliverance from all
perils by your prayers, blessed Saint, by your entreaties to your
Master.

A dark cloud of despair and a fog of misery now hide me, affliction on
affliction troubles me, while fear of dangers seizes me. I beg you, save
me, blessed of God, for I name you my defender, and send me your help,
Father, as I call on you.

Having received grace from God, you give healings to all who have
recourse to you beneath your protection, holy Nicolas. For you put to
flight the incurable passions of the demons, while by your intercession
you heal all. Therefore we also beseech you, intercede with the Lord
that those who sing your praise may be rescued from harm

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. The same.

You are the whole strength of our life and our refuge, Immaculate
Mother. You are the assistance of all who sing your praise. May those
who boast against your servants not count on your protection; for you
have been given as protection towards God. Therefore, Sovereign Lady, do
not disdain to save your servants.

Aposticha of the Apostles.

You have magnified the names of the Princes of the Apostles in the
inhabited world, O Saviour. They learned the ineffable mysteries of
heaven, they gave healings to those on earth, and their
shadows[\[15\]](#_ftn15) alone cured the passions. The one who was a
fisherman worked wonders; the one who was a Jew taught the doctrines of
grace. Through them, O Compassionate, grant us your great mercy.

We who are warred upon from every side and take refuge in you, who alone
are truly God, offer you the words of your Disciples as we say, ‘Save
us, Teacher, we are perishing’.[\[16\]](#_ftn16) Show now also to our
enemies, we beg, that you protect your people and, at the intercession
of the Apostles, save them from dangers, overlooking their sins through
your great goodness. Lord, glory to you.

Of the Martyrs.

Great the glory that you gained through faith, O Saints\! For not only
did you defeat the foe when you suffered, but after death also you drive
out spirits; you heal the infirm, O physicians of souls and bodies.
Intercede with the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion. When from the Tree.

You protect all those who with faith take refuge in your mighty hand,
loving Lady; for we sinners, bowed down by many faults, have no other
constant mediation but you before God in dangers and afflictions, Mother
of God most high. Therefore we fall down before you, ‘Deliver your
servants from every disaster’.

## on Thursday evening

At Lord, I have cried, Prosomia of the Cross.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

Saviour, when you were nailed to the Cross, the sun, seeing it, was
darkened from fear of you and the veil of the Temple was rent, the earth
was shaken and the rocks likewise were split apart in terror, not having
strength to see their Creator on the Tree, suffering unjustly by his own
counsel and mocked by lawless men.[\[17\]](#_ftn17)

The all-evil serpent was utterly cast down to earth, utterly routed and
lay a lifeless corpse, when you were lifted up on the Tree, O Lover of
mankind. Adam is freed from the curse, and he, before condemned, is
saved.[\[18\]](#_ftn18) Therefore, we beg, save us too, take pity on all
and make us worthy of your Kingdom. 

When, by a Tree, the lawless people, slew you, the life of all, O
Saviour, then all creation trembled with fear, the palaces of Hell and
the might of death were utterly destroyed by your divine power. Then too
Adam the forefather cried out to you with joy, ‘Glory to your
condescension, O Lover of humankind’.

Of the Mother of God. Same melody.

Assent to the prayers of your suppliants, Pure Virgin, and grant us
springs of tears, that we may wash away the stains of our offences, O
All-blameless, and quench the flame of everlasting and most bitter fire.
For you fulfil the requests of those who with their whole heart call on
you, the Mother of the Master.

Storm-tossed by a tempest of contrary thoughts and by life’s waves,
borne hither and thither by disordered spirits of the dread ruler of
this world,[\[19\]](#_ftn19) I cry to you, O Virgin, ‘Hasten to rescue
me from the dangers that hold me fast’, so that with a thankful heart I
may proclaim your mighty deeds to all the faithful, O Full of God’s
grace.

Pure Sovereign Lady, see my weakness and the misery of my wretched soul
and the affliction of my heart, and scatter the counsels of invisible
foes, who assail me and make fearful war on me. For you, who gave birth
to God, can grant redemption to those in mortal dangers.

Aposticha of the Cross.

Save me, Christ Saviour, by the power of the Cross, who saved Peter in
the sea,[\[20\]](#_ftn20) and have mercy on me, O God.

You have revealed the Tree of your Cross as a tree of
life,[\[21\]](#_ftn21) Christ our God, to us who believe in you; and
through it you destroyed the one who held the might of death and made
us, who had been slain by sin, alive. And so we cry to you: Benefactor
of all, Lord, glory to you.

Of the Martyrs.

The Champions did not long for earthly pleasure and so were found worthy
of heavenly good things, and the have become fellow citizens of the
Angels. Lord, at their prayers have mercy and save us.

Glory. Both now. Cross-Theotokion. When from the Tree.

Pure Virgin, when you saw the ripe grape Cluster[\[22\]](#_ftn22) that
you had bore unhusbanded in your womb hanging upon the Tree, lamenting
you bewailed him and cried out, ‘My Child, who drop down sweetness;
Benefactor, through whom may all the drunkenness of the passions be
abolished by divine consolations, through me who gave you birth, for you
are compassionate’.

## ON FRIDAY EVENING

At Lord, I have cried, Prosomia of the Lord.

Tone 2. When from the Tree.

When you come in glory, O Christ, with the holy Angels to judge the
universe, when all stand naked before you to give a defence of what they
have done, then rank me with your sheep, O Word, granting me release
from all the offences, by which in my life I have
offended.[\[23\]](#_ftn23)

Tear up the cords of my passions, dry up the putrefaction of my soul,
only Lover of mankind, give me tears of compunction, enlighten my
darkened heart, rescue me, I pray, from trouble, the storm of hostile
disasters and from temptations of many kinds, from the dread foe and
ruler of the world.[\[24\]](#_ftn24)

Consider in your mind, my soul, that most dreaded hour of the judgement,
when fear will seize all creation and the Most High takes his seat on
the fearful throne to exact an account of all that we have done; hurry,
be reconciled to the Judge and cry out: I have sinned against you, Lord,
save me\!

Others, of the Mother of God. Same melody.

Wholly enslaved since my youth to shameful passions and great depravity,
I have completely blackened that which is in God’s
image[\[25\]](#_ftn25) and I quail, All-praised Lady, at the judgement
to come, when I shall stand before your Son and God. Now therefore,
before the end, Pure Virgin, give me cleansing of my passions and
redemption of offences.

I tremble at the judgement seat, the eternal penalty of the fire, the
sentence, against which there is truly no appeal, the gnashing of
teeth[\[26\]](#_ftn26) and the savagery of the worm that does not
sleep,[\[27\]](#_ftn27) All-blameless Virgin. Therefore in anguish of
heart I implore you to deliver me from the fearful condemnation.

When my soul is about to be forcibly parted from my body’s limbs, then
stand by my side and scatter the counsels of my bodiless foes and smash
the teeth of those who implacably seek to swallow me down, so that I may
pass unhindered through the rulers of darkness who wait in the
air,[\[28\]](#_ftn28) O Bride of God.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

The shadow of the law[\[29\]](#_ftn29) has passed away now that grace
has come, for as the Bush in flames was not burned,[\[30\]](#_ftn30) so
as a virgin you bore a child and remained a virgin; instead of a pillar
of fire[\[31\]](#_ftn31) the Sun of justice[\[32\]](#_ftn32) has dawned,
instead of Moses Christ, the salvation of our souls.

Aposticha of the Martyrs.

As the holy Martyrs intercede for us and sing Christ’s praises, all
error has ended and the human race is saved by faith.

Verse 1: ** God is wonderful in his Saints.

Choirs of Martyrs stood against tyrants, saying, ‘We soldier for the
King of powers; though you destroy us by fire and torments, we shall not
deny the power of the Trinity’.

Verse 2: For the Saints in his land the Lord has done wonders.

Great is the glory that you have gained through faith, O Saints; for not
only did you conquer the foe by suffering, but also after death you
drive out spirits, you heal the sick, O physicians of souls and bodies.
Intercede with the Lord to have mercy on our souls.

Verse 3: Blessed are those whom you have chosen and taken; they will
dwell in your courts.

Of the Dead.

As a flower withers and as a dream passes, so too every human dies; but
once again, when the trumpet sounds[\[33\]](#_ftn33) all the dead, as by
an earthquake will arise to meet you, Christ God; then, Master,
establish those whom you have taken over from us in the tents of your
Saints,[\[34\]](#_ftn34) the spirits of your servants, O Christ.

Glory. Both now. Theotokion.

All my hope I place in you, O Mother of the light; guard me beneath your
protection.

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) Luke 15,18.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) Cf. John 1,17 and Luke 1,28 ‘Hail, full of grace’.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Cf. John 1,17.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Luke 15,18.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) Luke 18,13.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Ezekiel 44,1-2.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) Matthew 13,8.

[\[8\]](#_ftnref8) Luke 15,18.

[\[9\]](#_ftnref9) Luke 18,13.

[\[10\]](#_ftnref10) Matthew 27,38-51.

[\[11\]](#_ftnref11) Genesis 3,17-19.

[\[12\]](#_ftnref12) Cf. Numbers 13,23.

[\[13\]](#_ftnref13) Matthew 14,28-31.

[\[14\]](#_ftnref14) Genesis 2,9.

[\[15\]](#_ftnref15) Acts 5,15.

[\[16\]](#_ftnref16) Matthew 8,25.

[\[17\]](#_ftnref17) Matthew 27,38-51.

[\[18\]](#_ftnref18) Genesis 3,17-19.

[\[19\]](#_ftnref19) Ephesians 6,12.

[\[20\]](#_ftnref20) Matthew 14,28-31.

[\[21\]](#_ftnref21) Genesis 2,9.

[\[22\]](#_ftnref22) Cf. Numbers 13,23.

[\[23\]](#_ftnref23) Matthew 25,31-33.

[\[24\]](#_ftnref24) Ephesians 6,12.

[\[25\]](#_ftnref25) Genesis 1,27.

[\[26\]](#_ftnref26) Matthew 13,42.

[\[27\]](#_ftnref27) Mark 9,48.

[\[28\]](#_ftnref28) Ephesians 6,12.

[\[29\]](#_ftnref29) Hebrews 10,1.

[\[30\]](#_ftnref30) Exodus 3,2.

[\[31\]](#_ftnref31) Exodus 13,21.

[\[32\]](#_ftnref32) Malachy 3,20 (4,2).

[\[33\]](#_ftnref33) 1 Corinthians 15,52.

[\[34\]](#_ftnref34) Cf. Psalm 117,15.

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

