\[ [Home](index.md) \] \[ [Up](ordinations.md) \]
\[ [Presbyter](presbyter.md) \] \[ [Deacon](deacon.md) \]
\[ Woman Deacon \]

# ORDER FOR THE ORDINATION OF A WOMAN DEACON

After the completion of the holy Anaphora and the opening of the doors,
before the Deacon says,* *Having commemorated all the
Saints,[\[1\]](#_ftn1) the one to be ordained is brought before the
Bishop. As he declaims the invocation, Divine grace,[\[2\]](#_ftn2)
etc., she bows her head, on which he lays his hand.

He makes the sign of the Cross three times over her and prays as
follows:**

Holy and All-powerful God, through the birth in flesh of your
Only-begotten Son and our God from a Virgin you sanctified woman, and
granted not only to men but also to women the grace and visitation of
the Holy Spirit. Now, Master, look upon this servant of yours also, call
her to the work of your service[\[3\]](#_ftn3) and send down upon her
the rich gift of your Holy Spirit. Guard her in your Orthodox faith in a
blameless way of life in accordance with what is well pleasing to you,
as she fulfils her ministry[\[4\]](#_ftn4) at every
moment.[\[5\]](#_ftn5)

For to you belong all glory, honour and worship, Father, Son and Holy
Spirit, now and for ever, and to the ages of ages. Amen.

After the Amen ** one of the Deacons prays as follows:**

In peace, let us pray to the Lord. And the rest, as in the ordination of
male Deacons, with the necessary changes of gender in the petition for
the candidate.

While the Deacon is saying this, the Bishop, with his hand still resting
on the head of the one being ordained, prays as follows:

Master and Lord, you do not reject women who offer themselves, and by
divine counsel, to minister as is fitting to your holy houses, but you
accept them in the order of ministers. Give the grace of your Holy
Spirit to this servant of yours also, who wishes to offer herself to
you, and to accomplish the grace of the diaconate, as you gave the grace
of your diaconate to Phoebe, whom you called to the work of the
ministry. Grant her, O God, to persevere without condemnation in your
holy churches, to give careful attention to her way of life, to chastity
in particular, and show her to be your perfect servant, that, when she
stands before the judgement of Christ, she may also receive the fitting
reward of her way of life.[\[6\]](#_ftn6)

By the mercy and love for humankind of your Only-begotten Son, with whom
you are blessed, etc.**

And after the Amen ** the Bishop places the Deacon’s Orarion on her
neck, under the Maphorion, bringing the two extremities round to the
front.[\[7\]](#_ftn7)

The other Deacon stands outside the Sanctuary and says:

Having commemorated all the Saints, again and again in peace, let us
pray to the Lord, etc.

After she has received Communion of the holy Body and Blood, the Bishop
hands her the Chalice. When she has taken it, she places it on the holy
Table.

 

-----

[\[1\]](#_ftnref1) The ordination takes place at the same point of the
Liturgy as that for male Deacons and the role of the diaconate as the
minister of the Chalice is stressed by the giving of the Chalice to the
newly ordained woman Deacon. This clearly indicates that the newly
ordained was admitted to the Sanctuary and stood near the Altar. The
14th century canonist Matthew Blastares notes that, ’except for a few
things, the ordination of women deacons is to be performed like that for
male deacons’. He notes particularly that ‘she is brought to the Holy
Table’. The rubrical details in the  older books are few and the actual
formula of ordination is not given in full. As a result we do not know
how the candidate was described or what her ecclesiastical status was
before ordination. I do not think the fact that she only bows and does
not kneel has any theological signifance.

\[1\] This prayer is less specific than that for male Deacons and makes
no reference to the ‘service of the Mysteries’. On the other hand there
is no distinction between the sexes with regard to the ‘gift of the Holy
Spirit’ conferred by ordination.

[\[2\]](#_ftnref2) See the rite for male Deacons.

[\[3\]](#_ftnref3) Greek *diakonia*.

[\[4\]](#_ftnref4) Greek *leitourgia*. Here and elsewhere translated by
‘ministry’. The verb by ‘minister’.

[\[5\]](#_ftnref5) This prayer is less specific than that for male
Deacons and makes no reference to the ‘service of the Mysteries’. On the
other hand there is no distinction between the sexes with regard to the
‘gift of the Holy Spirit’ conferred by ordination.

[\[6\]](#_ftnref6) Whereas the model for the male diaconate is St
Stephen, that for women Deacons is St Phoebe of Kenchreae, who is
clearly described as a ‘Deacon’ in Romans 16. In contrast to the prayers
for male ordinands, the prayer underlines that fact that the woman has
offered herself for ordination, which is more reminiscent of the rite of
monastic profession.

[\[7\]](#_ftnref7) The woman Deacon is specifically said to be vested in
a ‘deacon’s orarion’, but she wears it with both ends hanging down in
front, like a western stole, rather than over the left shoulder. This
difference appears to be purely practical, since the woman Deacon would
be wearing the *maphorion*, or ample monastic veil, which would make
wearing the orarion over her shoulder difficult. 

 

-----

All texts and translations on this page are copyright to  
Archimandrite Ephrem ©

**This page was last updated on 03 November 2008**

